The Puducherry Ease of Doing Business (Service Delivery) Act, 2025
Act No. 1 of 2026
DISCLAIMER: This document is being furnished to you for your information by PRS Legislative Research
(PRS). The contents of this document have been obtained from sources PRS believes to be reliable. These
contents have not been independently verified, and PRS makes no representation or warranty as to the accuracy,
completeness or correctness. In some cases the Principal Act and/or Amendment Act may not be available.
Principal Acts may or may not include subsequent amendments. For authoritative text, please contact the relevant
state department concerned or refer to the latest government publication or the gazette notification. Any person
using this material should take their own professional and legal advice before acting on any information contained
in this document. PRS or any persons connected with it do not accept any liability arising from the use of this
document. PRS or any persons connected with it shall not be in any way responsible for any loss, damage, or
distress to any person on account of any action taken or not taken on the basis of this document.
Registered with the Registrar
of Newspapers for India under
No.10410

La Gazette de L' État de Poudouchéry
The Gazette of Puducherry
PART - II
 EXTRAORDINAIRE EXTRAORDINARY
 Publiée par Published by
 Autorité Authority
   2026 } | 9 {
No. 10 Poudouchéry Lundi 9 Février 2026
No. Puducherry Monday 9th February 2026
(20 Magha 1947)
GOVERNMENT OF PUDUCHERRY
LAW DEPARTMENT
No.100/Leg./2025-LD.
Puducherry, dated 09th February 2026.
The following Act of the Legislative Assembly, Puducherry, received
the assent of the President of India, on the 31st day of January, 2026 and is
hereby published for general information.
A. VIKRANTH RAJA, I.A.S.,
Secretary to Government (Law).
[63]
64 LA GAZETTE DE L'ETAT [PART–II
THE PUDUCHERRY EASE OF DOING
BUSINESS (SERVICE DELIVERY) ACT, 2025
(Act No. 1 of 2026)
(31-01-2026)
AN
ACT
to provide for speedy, transparent, efficient and time
bound delivery of services by way of processing
the application and issue of various clearances
required to be issued by various Competent
Authority or Authorities of the Government of
Puducherry under various enactments for
establishing an Industrial or service or business
undertakings including renewals in time bound
manner for the promotion of economic development
and for an investment friendly environment in the
Union territory of Puducherry and for matters
connected therewith or incidental thereto.
BE it enacted by the Legislative Assembly of
Puducherry in the Seventy-sixth Year of the Republic of
India as follows:—
Short title, 1. (1) This Act may be called the “Puducherry
extent and Ease of Doing Business [Service Delivery]
commencement.
Act, 2025”.
(2) It shall extend to the whole of the Union
territory of Puducherry.
(3) It shall come into force at once.
Definitions. 2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise
requires,-
(a) “Appellate Authority” means, the
authority referred to under section 9;
(b) “Applicant” means, a person duly
authorized by an enterprise to file an
application on behalf of the enterprise
through online or in person and the word
“Application” shall be construed accordingly;
PART–II] LA GAZETTE DE L'ETAT 65
(c) “Checklist” means, list of documents /
evidences to be furnished by the
applicant along with the Application Form
as may be prescribed;
(d) “Clearances” means, grant or issue of
no-objection certificates, allotments,
consents, approvals, permissions,
registrations, enrolments, licences and the
like ones, by any Competent Authority or
Authorities in connection with the setting
up of an enterprise or expansion of an
existing enterprise in the Union territory
of Puducherry and shall include all such
approvals essentially required, till the
enterprise starts commercial production
and includes periodic renewals that may
inevitably be required for such
clearances;
(e) “Competent Authority” means, Head of
any Department or Agency of the
Government, Corporation, Board, Local
Body or other Authority established by
the Government, which are entrusted with
the powers or responsibilities to grant or
issue of clearances or incentives;
(f) “Deemed Approval” means, the approval
as specified under section 6;
(g) “Department” means, a Department of the
Government of Puducherry;
(h) “Designated Officer” means, an Officer
identified by a Competent Authority for
processing of clearances;
66 LA GAZETTE DE L'ETAT [PART–II
(i) “Enterprise” means, an undertaking that
intends to engage in or is engaged in any
or all of the activities, namely,
manufacturing, processing, providing
services or engaging in business/trade;
(j) “Government” means, the Administrator
appointed by the President under Article
239 of the Constitution;
(k) “Nodal Agency” means, the agency
referred to in section 10;
(l) “Notification” means, a notification
published in the Official Gazette of
Government of Puducherry and the word
“Notified” shall be construed
accordingly;
(m) “Prescribed” means, prescribed by the
rules made under this Act;
(n) “Schedule” means, the Schedule appended
to this Act.
(o) “Service” means, services, including
functions, obligations, responsibility or
duty, to be provided or rendered by a
Public-Authority for issue of clearance;
(p) “Stipulated time” means, the maximum
time excluding public holidays to provide
the applied / requested service by the
Public Authority;
(q) “Subordinate Public Servant” means, an
officer subordinate to the Designated
Officer who is responsible for processing
the Application.
PART–II] LA GAZETTE DE L'ETAT 67
3. (1) Notwithstanding anything contained in Notification of
Designated
any law for the time being in force, the
O f f i c e r s ,
Competent Authority, within a period of procedure and
three months from the date of checklist for
commencement of this Act, with the processing of
applications.
approval of Government, shall notify the
Checklist and the procedure for
processing and disposal of applications
and Designate Officer / Officers for
providing services under this Act.
(2) The Checklist and the Procedure shall be
made available on the website of the
Department by the Competent Authority.
4. (1) An applicant shall apply through online Application for
for clearance in the prescribed form with Clearance.
necessary particulars and supporting
documents as prescribed in the checklist:
Provided that the Government may allow
submission of physical application during
transitional period, till such time, as it may
notify.
(2) Every application received, shall be given
a number by the Designated Officer or by
the online system to enable the applicant
to monitor the status of the application in
accordance with such procedure as may
be prescribed.
(3) If, the application is submitted to an
Authority other than the Competent
Authority or Designated Officer or
Subordinate Public Servant for clearance,
then the Officer who received the
application shall forward it to the
concerned Designated Officer within 3
days on receipt of the application and for
such application 5 days additional time
shall be added to the stipulated time.
68 LA GAZETTE DE L'ETAT [PART–II
Disposal of 5. (1) The Designated Officer as notified under
application. section 3 of this Act shall, on receipt of
the application, consider and dispose it
by passing an order either approving or
rejecting the same within the stipulated
time, as mentioned in the Schedule.
(2) The Designated Officer or Subordinate
Public Servant shall have the powers to
seek additional information or clarification,
if required, from the applicant:
Provided that the additional information
or clarification shall be sought for only
once before the expiry of the stipulated
time prescribed in the Schedule.
(3) The stipulated time shall, start from the
date of application excluding the days
during which additional information or
clarification is sought and received.
(4) The Designated Officer shall give reasons
in the order, in case, the application is
rejected.
(5) The signed final order of approval or
rejection shall be made available online to
the applicant in downloadable format.
Deemed 6. (1) In case of failure to issue the required
Approval. approval within the time-limit specified in
the Schedule, such approvals shall be
deemed to have been issued and the
entrepreneurs may proceed with the
implementation of the project without
contravening any of the provisions of the
Act, rules, bye-laws, notifications,
standing orders, executive instructions,
guidelines and regulations made by the
Competent Authority concerned for such
clearances:
PART–II] LA GAZETTE DE L'ETAT 69
Provided if any deviations by the
applicant with respect to the provisions
of the relevant Statutes are detected, the
Competent Authority shall take action as
deemed fit against the applicant under the
concerned Statutes.
(2) The deemed approval shall be made as an
automatic process in the online system
and made available to the applicant in
downloadable format.
7. (1) Any applicant aggrieved by a decision of Appeal.
the Designated Officer within thirty days
from the receipt of such decision, may
prefer an appeal to the Competent
Authority:
Provided that the Competent Authority
may admit the appeal after the expiry of
the period of thirty days, if, it is satisfied
that the Appellant was prevented by
sufficient cause from filing the appeal in
time.
(2) In its decision, the Competent Authority
shall have the power to:-
(a) Reject the appeal.
(b) Give any suitable directions to the
Designated Officer.
(c) Impose any of the penalties provided
under this Act;
8. (1) The Competent Authority at the time of Penalty and
deciding any appeal is of the opinion that Procedure for
deciding an
the Designated Officer or Subordinate
Appeal.
Public Servant, as the case may be, who
has, without any reasonable cause, failed
to deliver the service to an applicant
70 LA GAZETTE DE L'ETAT [PART–II
within the stipulated time under section 5
or causes in issue of deemed approval
under section 6, it shall impose a penalty
of two hundred and fifty rupees each day
till service is delivered:
Provided that the total amount of said
penalty shall not exceed twenty-five
thousand rupees.
Provided further that the penalty amount
shall be increased by 10% after every
three years from the commencement of
this Act.
Provided also that no penalty shall be
imposed on the Designated Officer or
Subordinate Public Servant, as the case
may be, before giving him a reasonable
opportunity of being heard by way of a
written notice, returnable within 15
working days.
Provided also that the burden of proof for
acting reasonably and diligently, shall be
on the Designated Officer or Subordinate
Public Servant, as the case may be.
(2) The Designated Officer or Subordinate
Public Servant, as the case may be, who
is aggrieved by the order passed by the
Competent Authority in accordance with
section 8(1) shall be entitled to file an
appeal to the Appellate Authority against
such order within a period not exceeding
thirty days of the receipt of the impugned
order.
PART–II] LA GAZETTE DE L'ETAT 71
(3) For the purpose of this Act, the appeal
against the order of the Appellate
Authority shall lie with the Appointing
Authority of the appropriate cadre of the
Competent Authority / Designated Officer /
Subordinate Public Servant.
9. (1) For the purpose of this Act, the A p p e l l a t e
Government shall appoint an Appellate Authority.
Authority to decide on the penalty
against any Designated Officer or
Subordinate Public Servant who fails to
deliver the services within the stipulated
time or causes in issue of deemed
clearance, as the case may be.
(2) The Appellate Authority shall comprise
of the following Members:-
Chief Secretary to . .Chairperson
Government
Secretary to Government . .Member
(Industries and Commerce).
Secretary to Government of . .Member
the Department concerned.
10. The Directorate of Industries and Commerce Nodal Agency.
shall act as the Nodal Agency to facilitate the
delivery of clearances that are required for
setting up of new enterprises or expansion or
renewal of existing enterprises.
11. The Nodal Agency under the superintendence, Functions of the
direction and control of the Government, Nodal Agency.
shall be responsible in discharging the
following functions, namely:-
(a) act as a single point of contact for all
enterprises that require clearances and as
notified by the Government under section 3;
72 LA GAZETTE DE L'ETAT [PART–II
(b) assist the applicants in filing of
applications online;
(c) arrange for pre-scrutiny of applications by
convening meetings with representatives
of Competent Authorities and address
queries of investors;
(d) receive applications for clearances
through single window portal;
(e) review and monitor the processing of
applications by the Competent Authorities;
(f) compile the number of applications
processed outside the stipulated time and
deemed approvals generated every
quarter and place before the Appellate
Authority;
(g) act as Investor Facilitation Center for
investment proposal, industrial
facilitation, regulatory reforms and
obtaining user feedback, queries and
grievance handling.
Inspection. 12. (1) The Government may, by notification,
specify the clearances for which
inspections under the provisions of the
applicable Acts, rules, orders or
instructions shall be conducted by the
Competent Authorities in accordance with
such guidelines as may be prescribed.
(2) The Government may, from time to time,
by notification, specify the clearances for
which exemption is granted from
inspection and may also delegate the
powers of inspection to any person or
authority in respect of any specific
clearance covered under this Act.
PART–II] LA GAZETTE DE L'ETAT 73
13. (1) The defaults on the part of an Officer in Developing
the time bound delivery of services as culture to deliver
services within
defined in this Act shall not be counted
fixed period.
towards misconduct, as the purpose and
object is to sensitize the public servant
towards the citizen and to enhance and
imbibe a culture to deliver time bound
services to the citizens.
(2) In case of any Officer who is a habitual
and wilful defaulter, without any
reasonable cause and persistently failed
to receive an application or has failed to
provide service within the stipulated time
or intentionally denied the request for the
service or delayed inordinately, appropriate
disciplinary action shall be taken against
the Officer under the relevant rules
applicable to him.
(3) To encourage and recognize superior
performance of Designated Officer(s)
having ad hered to the stipulated timeline
without default, a suitable entry shall be
made in the Annual Performance Report
by the Reporting Officer concerned.
14. The provisions of this Act shall be Supplement.
supplemented to the disciplinary and financial
rules and such other service rules and
regulations as applicable, to the employees of
the Government or Local Authority or Public
Authority concerned, as the case may be, and
not in derogation to such service rules and
regulations governing the service condition
and conduct of the Government Employees or
the employees of the other Public Authorities
concerned.
15. No suit, prosecution or other legal proceedings Protection of
shall lie against any person for anything which action taken in
good faith.
is done in good faith or intended to be done
under this Act or any rule made thereunder.
74 LA GAZETTE DE L'ETAT [PART–II
Bar of jurisdiction. 16. No Civil Court shall have jurisdiction in
respect of any matter which the Competent
Authority or Designated Officer or
Subordinate Public Servant is empowered by
under this Act to determine.
Power to make 17. (1) The Government may, after previous
rules.
publication, by notification, in the Official
Gazette, make rules to carry out the
purposes of this Act.
(2) Every rule made or notification issued
under this Act, shall as soon as may be
after it is made be laid before the
Legislative Assembly, Puducherry, while
it is in session for a total period of
fourteen days, which may be comprised
in one session or in two or more
successive sessions, and if before the
expiry of the session in which it is so laid,
or the session immediately following, the
Legislative Assembly makes any
modification in the rule or notification or
decide that any rule or notification
should not be made or issued, the rule or
notification shall thereafter have effect
only in such modified form or be of no
effect, as the case may be, so, however,
that any such modification or annulment
shall be without prejudice to the validity
of anything previously done under that
rule or notification.
Power to amend 18. (1) The Government may by notification alter,
the Schedule. add to or cancel the Schedule.
PART–II] LA GAZETTE DE L'ETAT 75
(2) All references made in the Act to the
Schedule shall be construed as relating to
that Schedule as in the time being
amended in exercise of the powers
conferred by this section.
19. (1) If any difficulty arises, in giving effect to Removal of
the provisions of this Act, the difficulties.
Government may by order publish in the
Official Gazette, make such provisions not
inconsistent with the provisions of this
Act, as may appear to it, be necessary or
expedient for removing the difficulty:
Provided that no such order shall be
made under this section after the expiry
of a period of two years from the date of
commencement of this Act.
(2) Every order made under this section shall,
as soon as it is made, be placed on the
table of Legislative Assembly, Puducherry.
20. The Government may, by notification, exempt Power to Exempt.
any clearances from any of its provisions
subject to such conditions as they deem fit
and may cancel or modify any such
notification, in this Act.
21. Save as otherwise provided in this Act, the Act to override
provisions of this Act shall have effect other laws.
notwithstanding anything inconsistent
therewith contained in any other law for the
time being in force or any custom or usage or
any instrument having effect by virtue of any
such law.
22. Notwithstanding anything contained in the Applicability.
Act, it shall not apply to any other Authority,
Department, Government other than Government
of Puducherry.
76 LA GAZETTE DE L'ETAT [P ART–II
SCHEDULE
[see Clause (n) of Section 2 read with section 5(1)]
List of Services, Competent Authority, Stipulated Time for Disposal of
Application
Sl. Service Competent Stipulated Time
No. Authority for Disposal*
(1) (2) (3) (4)
Department of Science, Technology and Environment
1. Consent to Establish / Member-Secretary, 15 days from the
Operate under Air Puducherry Pollution date of receipt of
(Prevention and Control of Control Committee. application.
Pollution) Act, 1981 - Green
Category.
2. Consent to Establish / Member-Secretary, 15 days from the
Operate under Water Puducherry Pollution date of receipt of
(Prevention and Control of Control Committee. application.
Pollution) Act, 1974 - Green
Category.
3. Consent to Establish / Member-Secretary, 30 days from the
Operate under Air Puducherry Pollution date of receipt of
(Prevention and Control of Control Committee. application.
Pollution) Act, 1981 -
Orange /Red Category.
4. Consent to Establish / Member-Secretary, 30 days from the
Operate under Water Puducherry Pollution date of receipt of
(Prevention and Control of Control Committee. application.
Pollution) Act, 1974 -
Orange / Red Category.
5. Authorization under the Member-Secretary, 30 days from the
Hazardous and other Puducherry Pollution date of receipt
Wastes (Management and Control Committee. of application
Transboundary Movement) complete in all
Rules, 2016 as amended respects.
time to time.
PART–II] LA GAZETTE DE L'ETAT 77
(1) (2) (3) (4)
6. E-Waste (Management) Member-Secretary, 30 days from the
Rules, 2022. Central Pollution date of receipt of
Control Board. application
complete in all
respect or as per
Guidelines / SOP
issued under the
E-Waste
(Management)
Rules, 2022 by
the Central
Pollution Control
Board [CPCB] as
amended, whichever
is earlier.
7. Plastic Waste Management Member-Secretary, 30 days from the
Rules, 2016 as amended. Puducherry Pollution date of receipt of
Control Committee. application or as
per Guidelines /
SOP issued under
Plastic Waste
Management
Rules, 2016, as
amended whichever
is earlier.
Labour Department
8. Approval of plan and Chief Inspector of 30 days from the
permission to construct / Factories and Boilers. date of receipt of
extend / or take into use application.
any building as a factory
under the Factories Act,
1948.
78 LA GAZETTE DE L'ETAT [PART–II
(1) (2) (3) (4)
9. Registration of Factories Chief Inspector of 30 days from the
under the Factories Act, Factories and Boilers. date of receipt of
1948 / Licence. application.
10. Registration of Boilers Chief Inspector of 30 days from the
under the Boilers Act, 1923. Factories and Boilers. date of receipt of
application.
11. Registration of Boilers Chief Inspector of 30 days from the
Manufacturers under the Factories and Boilers. date of receipt of
Boilers Act, 1923. application.
12. Licence for contractors Labour Commissioner, 21 days from the
under provision of the Labour Department. date of receipt of
Contract Labour (Regulation application.
and Abolition) Act, 1970.
13. Registration under the Labour Commissioner, 7 days from the
Puducherry Shops and Labour Department. date of receipt of
Establishments Act, 1964 application.
(including 365 days Licence).
14. Registration of Principal Labour Commissioner, 7 days from the
Employer’s Establishment Labour Department. date of receipt of
under provision of the application.
Contract Labour (Regulation
and Abolition) Act, 1970.
15. Registration under the Labour Commissioner, 7 days from the
Building and other Labour Department. date of receipt of
Construction Workers application.
(Regulation of Employment
and Conditions of Service)
Act, 1996.
16. Registration of Establishment Labour Commissioner, 7 days from the
under the Inter State Migrant Labour Department. date of receipt of
Workmen (RE & CS) Act, 1979. application.
PART–II] LA GAZETTE DE L'ETAT 79
(1) (2) (3) (4)
PIPDIC
17. Allotment of Land in Managing Director - 30 days from the
Industrial Estates / Parks. PIPDIC. date of receipt of
application.
Town and Country Planning Department
18. Change in Land Use Chief Town Planner, 71 days from the
TCP. date of receipt of
application.
19. Certificate of Land Use Chief Town Planner, 45 days from the
TCP. approval and final
Notification of the
Government.
Planning Authority
20. Building Plan Approval Member-Secretary, 15 days from the
Planning Authority. date of receipt of
application.
21. Plinth Level Inspection Member-Secretary, 5 days from the
Planning Authority. date of intimation.
22. Completion / Occupancy Member-Secretary, 7 days from the
Certificate. Planning Authority. date of receipt of
application.
Public Works Department
23. Water Connection Chief Engineer, Public 30 days from the
Works Department. date of receipt of
application.
24. Registration of Contractors Chief Engineer, Public 30 days from the
for Works and Service. Works Department. date of receipt of
application.
25. Sewer Connection Chief Engineer, Public 30 days from the
Works Department. date of receipt of
application.
80 LA GAZETTE DE L'ETAT [PART–II
(1) (2) (3) (4)
26. Certificate of non-availability Chief Engineer, Public 30 days from the
of Water. Works Department. date of receipt of
application.
Electricity Department
27. Obtaining Electricity Superintending Engineer, As per the
Connection - HT. Electricity Department. Electricity (Rights
of Consumers)
Rules, 2020, as
amended from time
to time.
28. Obtaining Electricity Superintending Engineer, As per the
Connection - LT. Electricity Department. Electricity (Rights
of Consumers)
Rules, 2020, as
amended from time
to time.
29. Approval for DG set Superintending Engineer, As per the
Installation. Electricity Department. Electricity (Rights
of Consumers)
Rules, 2020, as
amended from time
to time subject to
condition that to
switch over to
cleaner
technologies by
2025 as insisted
in sub-rule (6) of
rule 10 of the
above Rules.
Local Bodies
30. Issue of Permission to Commissioner, 7 days from the
establish industry / Local Body. date of receipt of
service / business. clearances.
PART–II] LA GAZETTE DE L'ETAT 81
(1) (2) (3) (4)
31. Registration for Trade Commissioner, 10 days from the
Licence / Licence. Local Body. date of receipt of
application.
32. Registration under Commissioner, 10 days from the
Professional Tax Local Body. date of receipt of
application.
33. Sanction for Storage of Commissioner, 7 days from the
Construction material Local Body. date of receipt of
application.
34. Movie shooting Permission Commissioner, 7 days from the
Local Body. date of receipt of
application.
35. Registration of Hotels Commissioner, 10 days from the
Local Body. date of receipt of
application.
36. Water Connection Commissioner, 30 days from the
Local Body. date of receipt of
application.
37. Road Cutting Permission Commissioner, 7 days from the
Local Body. date of receipt of
application.
38. Inspection carried out for Commissioner, 7 days from the
Road cutting permission and Local Body. date of receipt of
Verification to ensure proper application.
restoration.
39. Signage Licence for Commissioner, 30 days from the
Advertisement. Local Body. date of receipt of
application.
40. Travel Agency Commissioner, 30 days from the
Local Body. date of receipt of
application.
82 LA GAZETTE DE L'ETAT [PART–II
(1) (2) (3) (4)
41. Tourism Events-Performance Commissioner, 30 days from the
Licence. Local Body. date of receipt of
application.
Revenue and Disaster Management
42. Property Registration – District Registrar / 7 days from the
Appointment Date. Sub-Registrar. date of receipt of
application.
43. Property Registration – District Registrar / 3 days from the
Issue of Registered Deed. Sub-Registrar. date of
appointment.
44. Property Registration – District Registrar / 30 days from the
Mutation. Sub-Registrar. date of
Registration.
45. Encumbrance Certificate District Registrar / 30 days from the
Sub-Registrar. date of
Registration.
46. Measurement / Demarcation Director of Land 30 days from the
of Land. and Survey. date of
Registration.
47. Registration under State Deputy Commissioner – 15 days from the
Excise. State Excise. date of receipt of
application.
48. State Excise – Deputy Commissioner – 15 days from the
Label Registration. State Excise. date of receipt of
application.
49. Licence under State Excise Deputy Commissioner – 30 days from the
for Local Sale, Import and State Excise. date of receipt of
Export permit of Spirit and application.
Indian Made Foreign Liquor
(IMFL).
PART–II] LA GAZETTE DE L'ETAT 83
(1) (2) (3) (4)
50. Registration under Legal Controller of Legal 15 days from the
Metrology Act, 2009. Metrology. date of receipt of
application.
51. Certificate for verification Controller of Legal 15 days from the
of Weights and Measures. Metrology. date of receipt of
application.
52. Registration under State District Collector 30 days from the
Cinema Regulation Rules. date of receipt of
application.
53. State Protected Monument – District Collector 30 days from the
Movie Shooting Permission. date of receipt of
application.
54. Permission from District District Collector 30 days from the
Collector for Movie Shooting. date of receipt of
application.
55. Cinematograph Licence and District Collector 30 days from the
Licence for Screening Films date of receipt of
(as applicable). application.
56. State Excise Licence Deputy Commissioner – 15 days from the
(a) Wholesale vendor State Excise date of receipt of
Licence. application.
(b) Import Permits
(c) Licence for Retail Sale
(d) Licence for Setting up
of Distilleries.
(e) Licence for Setting up
of Bottling Plant.
57. NOC required for setting up District Collector 30 days from the
of explosives manufacturing, date of receipt of
storage, sale, transport. application.
84 LA GAZETTE DE L'ETAT [PART–II
(1) (2) (3) (4)
58. NOC required for setting up District Collector 30 days from the
of petroleum, diesel, naphtha date of receipt of
storage, sale, transport. application.
59. Licence for Sale of Crackers District Collector 30 days from the
date of receipt of
application.
60. Mining Lease / Composite District Collector 30 days from the
Licence / Non-exclusive date of receipt of
Reconnaissance Permit. application.
61. Issue of letter of Intent in District Collector 30 days from the
case of fresh lease (for date of receipt of
environmental clearance – application.
category B2-Less than
5 acres).
62. NOC for Soil excavation / District Collector 30 days from the
filling. date of receipt of
application.
63. Licensing for Auditorium / District Collector 30 days from the
Places of Public Amusement / date of receipt of
Performance for Public application.
Amusement (as Applicable).
64. Resolution of Public District Collector 30 days from the
Grievances. date of receipt of
application.
Health and Family Welfare Department
65. Registration for Provisional / Director of Health 30 days from the
Permanent Certificate for and Family Welfare. date of receipt of
clinical establishment under application.
Clinical Establishments
(Registration and Regulation)
Act, 2010.
PART–II] LA GAZETTE DE L'ETAT 85
(1) (2) (3) (4)
66. Registration under PC & Director of Health 70 days from the
PNDT Act,1994 (Amended, and Family Welfare. date of receipt of
2003) (for 5 years). application.
Department of Drugs Control
67. Retail Licence under the Licensing Authority 15 days from the
Provisions of Drugs and date of receipt of
Cosmetics Act, 1940 and application.
Rules made thereunder.
68. Wholesale Licence under Licensing Authority 15 days from the
the provisions of Drugs date of receipt of
and Cosmetics Act, 1940 application.
and Rules made thereunder.
69. Granting of Drug Licensing Authority 30 days from the
Manufacturing Licence. date of receipt of
application.
Food Safety
70. Grant of State Licence for
Food Business.
(a) First Response from Designated Officer 15 days from the
Licensing Authority upon receipt of the
scrutiny application. application.
[sub-clause 2.1.4
(2) of Food Safety
and Standards
(Licensing and
Registration of
Food Businesses)
Regulations, 2011].
86 LA GAZETTE DE L'ETAT [PART–II
(1) (2) (3) (4)
(b) Generation of Licence Designated Officer 60 days from the
date of making
the complete,
application.
[sub-clause 2.1.6
of Food Safety
and Standards
(Licensing and
Registration of
Food Businesses)
Regulations, 2011].
71. Health NOC for Food
Registration Certificate
(a) Grant of FSSAI Registering Authority 07 days from the
Registration Certificate, date of the
if inspection not required. application.
[sub-clause 2.1.1
(3) of Food Safety
and Standards
(Licensing and
Registration of
Food Businesses)
Regulations, 2011].
(b) Grant of FSSAI Registering Authority 30 days from the
Registration Certificate, date of the
if inspection required. application.
[sub-clause 2.1.1
(4) of Food Safety
and Standards
(Licensing and
Registration of
Food Businesses)
Regulations, 2011].
PART–II] LA GAZETTE DE L'ETAT 87
(1) (2) (3) (4)
Transport Department
72. Registration of Vehicles Transport Commissioner 2 days from the
date of receipt of
application.
73. Transfer of vehicle Transport Commissioner 10 days from the
registration. date of receipt of
application.
74. Issuing Vehicle fitness Transport Commissioner 5 days from the
certificate. date of receipt of
application.
75. Grant of Permit – Taxi, Maxi Transport Commissioner 15 days from the
Cab, Omni Bus. date of receipt of
application.
76. Goods Carriage Permit Transport Commissioner 10 days from the
date of receipt of
application.
Commercial Taxes Department
77. Registration under GST Commissioner, As per Central
Commercial Taxes. GST Act.
Fire Service Department
78. Fire Licence / NOC Divisional Fire Officer 30 days from the
date of receipt of
application.
Forest and Wildlife Department
79. Certificate of Non-Forest Conservator of Forest 15 days from the
Land. date of receipt of
application.
88 LA GAZETTE DE L'ETAT [PART–II
(1) (2) (3) (4)
80. Letter for Distance from Conservator of Forest 15 days from the
Forest. date of receipt of
application.
Department of Information Technology
81. Mobile Tower Approval Director of Information 30 days from the
Technology. date of receipt of
application.
Police Department
82. Movie Shooting Permission Director-General of 30 days from the
Police. date of receipt of
application.
Registrar of Co-operative Societies
83. Registration of Co-operative Registrar of 30 days from the
Societies. Co-operative Societies. date of receipt of
application.
Ground Water Authority
84. NOC for Water abstraction Member-Secretary, 30 days from the
from Puducherry Ground Puducherry Ground date of receipt of
Water Authority. Water Authority. application.
Department of Civil Supplies and Consumer Affairs
85. Grant of Licence for ‘Fair Director of Civil 30 days from the
Price Shops’ under the Supplies and Consumer date of receipt of
relevant Act. Affairs. application.
Department of School Education
86. Approvals for setting up Director of School 30 days from the
Hostel. Education. date of receipt of
application.
PART–II] LA GAZETTE DE L'ETAT 89
(1) (2) (3) (4)
87. Approvals for setting up Director of School 30 days from the
and operating a Play School. Education. date of receipt of
application.
88. Registration of Schools Director of School 30 days from the
under Right to Education. Education. date of receipt of
application.
89. NOC for setting up of CBSE Director of School 30 days from the
School. Education. date of receipt of
application.
Directorate of Industries and Commerce
90. Investor Facilitation Centre / Director of Industries 15 days from the
Investment Promotion – and Commerce. date of receipt of
Queries to be addressed. application.
91. Incentives Director of Industries 30 days from the
and Commerce. date of receipt of
application.
92. Procurement Director of Industries 30 days from the
and Commerce. date of receipt of
application.
* All queries / clarification related to the application have to be sought
within 7 days from the date of receipt of application, in one go.
Renewals, wherever applicable in the above services, shall be issued
within 7 days from the date of application, across the board.
Mis-submitted applications shall be redirected within 3 days by the
mis-received Authority / Officer to concerned Authority / Officer.
————
online publication at “https://styandptg.py.gov.in”
Published by the Director, Government Press, Puducherry.
