The Chandragutti Shree Renukamba Kshetra Development Authority Act, 2025
Act No. 16 of 2026
DISCLAIMER: This document is being furnished to you for your information by PRS Legislative Research
(PRS). The contents of this document have been obtained from sources PRS believes to be reliable. These
contents have not been independently verified, and PRS makes no representation or warranty as to the accuracy,
completeness or correctness. In some cases the Principal Act and/or Amendment Act may not be available.
Principal Acts may or may not include subsequent amendments. For authoritative text, please contact the relevant
state department concerned or refer to the latest government publication or the gazette notification. Any person
using this material should take their own professional and legal advice before acting on any information contained
in this document. PRS or any persons connected with it do not accept any liability arising from the use of this
document. PRS or any persons connected with it shall not be in any way responsible for any loss, damage, or
distress to any person on account of any action taken or not taken on the basis of this document.
21
(2) (1)(cid:3489) ಉಪಪ(cid:3187) ಕರಣದ ಅ(cid:3378)ಯ(cid:3618)(cid:3189) ನ (cid:3572)(cid:3650)(cid:3459) ಅ(cid:3468)(cid:3696)ಚ(cid:3488)ಯ (cid:3561)ಲಕ
(cid:3557)ಡ(cid:3617)ದ ಉಪ(cid:3539)ಧಗ(cid:3635) ಈ ಅ(cid:3468)(cid:3483)ಯಮದ(cid:3618)(cid:3189) ಅ(cid:3468)(cid:3483)ಯ(cid:3558)ತ(cid:3647)(cid:3228)ದ(cid:3178) (cid:3593) (cid:3714)(cid:3236)ೕ (cid:3707)(cid:3233)
ಪ(cid:3588)(cid:3407)ಮ(cid:3197)(cid:3588)(cid:3572)(cid:3228)ರತಕ(cid:3161) (cid:3455)(cid:3178) ಮ(cid:3425)(cid:3176) ಅಂಥ (cid:3572)(cid:3650)(cid:3459) ಅ(cid:3468)(cid:3696)ಚ(cid:3488)ಯ(cid:3485)(cid:3180) ,
(cid:3236)(cid:3425)(cid:3176) ಪ(cid:3378)ಸ(cid:3617)ದ (cid:3453)ನ(cid:3198)(cid:3161) ಂತ (cid:3560)ಂ(cid:3273)ನದಲ(cid:3189) ದ (cid:3572)(cid:3650)(cid:3459) (cid:3453)(cid:3482)ಂಕ(cid:3203)(cid:3161)
(cid:3501)(cid:3647)(cid:4305)ನ(cid:3191) ಯ(cid:3647)(cid:3228)(cid:3590)(cid:3659)(cid:3428) (cid:3557)ಡಬ(cid:3710)(cid:3455).
ಕ(cid:3482)(cid:4305)ಟಕ (cid:3587)ಜ(cid:3186) (cid:3497)ಲರ ಆ(cid:3459)(cid:3662)(cid:3485)(cid:3692)ರ
ಮ(cid:3425)(cid:3176) ಅವರ (cid:3713)ಸ(cid:3588)ನ(cid:3618)(cid:3189) ,
(cid:3303). (cid:3663)(cid:3187) ೕಧ(cid:3601)
ಸ(cid:3197)(cid:4305)ರದ (cid:3197)ಯ(cid:4305)ದ(cid:3663)(cid:4305),
(cid:3704)ಸ(cid:3453)ೕಯ ವ(cid:3186) ವ(cid:3707)ರಗ(cid:3635) ಮ(cid:3425)(cid:3176)
(cid:3662)ಸನ ರಚ(cid:3488) ಇ(cid:3617)(cid:3218).
PARLIAMENTARY AFFAIRS AND LEGISLATION SECRETARIAT
NOTIFICATION
NO.DPAL 85 SHASHANA 2025, BENGALURU, DATED:08.01.2026
(cid:3542)ರತ (cid:3704)(cid:3648)(cid:3467)ನದ ಅ(cid:3485)(cid:3278)(cid:3167) ೕಧ 348ರ (cid:3224)ಡ (3)ರ ಅ(cid:3378)ಯ(cid:3618)(cid:3189) (cid:3587)ಜ(cid:3186) (cid:3497)ಲ(cid:3588)ಂದ
ಅ(cid:3468)(cid:3202)ತ(cid:3236)(cid:3633)(cid:3693)ದ (cid:3284)ದ(cid:3187) (cid:3230)(cid:3423)(cid:3176) (cid:3663)(cid:3187) ೕ (cid:3594)(cid:3410)(cid:3197)ಂಬ (cid:3203)(cid:3193) ೕತ(cid:3187) ಅ(cid:3543)(cid:3652)(cid:3453)(cid:3179) (cid:3497)(cid:3187) (cid:3468)(cid:3197)ರ ಅ(cid:3468)(cid:3483)ಯಮ, 2025
(2026ರ ಕ(cid:3482)(cid:4305)ಟಕ ಅ(cid:3468)(cid:3483)ಯಮ (cid:3704)(cid:3218)(cid:3186) : 16) ರ (cid:3542)(cid:3677)ಂತರವ(cid:3485)(cid:3180) ಅ(cid:3468)(cid:3202)ತ ಆಂಗ(cid:3189) ಪಠ(cid:3186) (cid:3653)ಂ(cid:3455)
ಕ(cid:3482)(cid:4305)ಟಕ (cid:3587)ಜ(cid:3186) ಪತ(cid:3187) ದ (cid:3648)(cid:3669)ಷ (cid:3704)(cid:3273)(cid:3203)ಯ(cid:3618)(cid:3189) ((cid:3542)ಗ IV) ಪ(cid:3187) ಕ(cid:3348)ಸ(cid:3534)(cid:3203)ಂ(cid:3455) ಆ(cid:3459)(cid:3663)ಸ(cid:3617)(cid:3228)(cid:3458),-
KARNATAKA ACT NO. 16 OF 2026
(First Published in the Karnataka Gazette Extra-ordinary on the 8th day of January, 2026
THE CHANDRAGUTHI SHREE RENUKAMBA KSHETRA DEVELOPMENT
AUTHORITY ACT, 2025
(Received the assent of the Governor on the 7th day of January, 2026)
An Act to establish an Authority to develop and maintain the Chandraguthi Shree
Renukamba temple, in Sorab taluk, Shivamogga District.
Whereas it is expedient to establish an Authority to develop and maintain the
Chandraguthi Shree Renukamba temple,in Sorab taluk, Shivamogga District into tourist
centre and also to maintain it and for the matters connected there with or incidental
thereto;
Be it enacted by the Karnataka State Legislature in the seventy sixth year of the
Republic of India as follows:-
22
CHAPTER-I
PRELIMINARY
1. Short title, extent and commencement.- (1) This Act may be called the
Chandraguthi Shree Renukamba Kshetra Development Authority Act, 2025.
(2) It extends to the area of the Chandraguthi Shree Renukamba Kshetra as
defined in clause (j) of section (2).
(3) It shall come into force from such date as the State Government may, by
notification in the official Gazzette appoint and different dates may be appointed
for different provisions of the Act.
2. Definitions.- In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,
(a) "Amenity”means and includes roads, streets, sub-ways, lighting, drainage,
sanitation, electricity and water supply or other convenience, public works,
market places, post office, bank, hospitals, dispensary, police station, fair
price shop, milk booth, library, recreation centers, service stations of any
public utility service authorized by the Authority or other facility, and such
other amenity as the State Government may, by notification, specify;
(b) "Authority" means Chandraguthi Shree Renukamba Kshetra Development
Authority constituted under section 3;
(c) "Chairman" means the Chairman of the Authority;
(d) “Commissioner” means the Commissioner of the Hindu Religious
Institutions and charitable Endowment Department;
(e) "Committee" means the District Level committee and the State Level
Monitoring Committee constituted under section 18;
(f) "Fund" means fund of the Authority,
(g) "Member" means a member of the Authority:
(h) " Regulations" means regulations of the Authority made under section 38;
(i) "Rules" means rules made by the State Government under section 37;
(j) "Secretary” means the Secretary of the Authority appointed under section
10; and
(k) "Chandraguthi Shree Renukamba Kshetra” means and includes
Chandraguthi Shree Renukamba temple and all the group temples attached
thereto in Chandraguthi, Sorabha Taluk in Shivamogga district,the entire
area of Chandraguthi town and lands acquired by the State Government
from time to time for development of Chandraguthi Shree Renukamba
temple and such other area declared by the State Government, by
notification.
CHAPTER-II
ESTABLISHMENT OF CHANDRAGUTHI SHREE RENUKAMBA KSHETRA
DEVELOPMENT AUTHORITY AND ITS EMPLOYEES
3. Establishment of the Authority.- (1) As soon as may be, after the
commencement of this Act, there shall be established for the purposes of this Act,
an Authority called Chandraguthi Shree RenukambaKshetra Development
Authority.
(2) The Authority shall have its headquarters at the Chandraguthi Shree
Renukamba Temple in Sorabha taluk, Shivamogga district.
23
(3) The Authority shall be a body corporate by the name aforesaid, having
perpetual succession and a common seal with power to acquire, hold and dispose
of property, both movable and immovable, and to contract and shall by the said
name sue and be sued.
(4) The Authority shall consist of the following members namely:-
(a) The Minister in charge of Hindu Religious Institutions and Chairman
charitable Endowments Department
(b) The Minister in charge of the District Ex-officio
Vice
Chairman
(c) The Minister in charge of Tourism Ex-officio
vice
Chairman
(d) The Members of Parliament and the Members of the State Ex-officio
Legislature representing a part or whole of Chandraguthi Shree Members
Renukambakshetra whose electoral constituencies lie within the
limits of it
(e) The members of the Karnataka Legislative Council who have Ex-officio
selected District or Taluk as Nodal District or Taluk within the Members
jurisdiction of the Authority
(f) Not more than five members nominated by the State Government Members
from among the leading personalities having wide knowledge
about the historical background and mythology of Chandraguthi
Shree Renukambakshetra out of whom at least one shall belong
to the Scheduled Castes or the Scheduled Tribes and one shall be
a woman.
(g) The Chief Engineer (Communication and Building) Public Works Ex-officio
Department or his representative not below the rank of the Deputy Member
Secretary to Government.
(h) The Principal Secretary to Government, Finance Department or Ex-officio
his representative not below the rank of the Deputy Secretary to Member
Government.
(i) The Principal Secretary to Government, Revenue Department Ex-officio
(Endowment) or his representative not below the rank of the Member
Deputy Secretary to Government
(j) The Principal Secretary to Government Forest and Ecology Ex-officio
Department or his representative not below the rank of the Deputy Member
Secretary to Government.
(k) The Commissioner Hindu Religious Institution and Charitable Ex-officio
Endowment Member
(l) The Deputy Commissioner, Shivamogga district Ex-officio
Member
24
(m)The Chief Executive Officer, Zilla Panchayath,Shivamogga district Ex-officio
Member
(n) The Regional Director for Archaeology and Museums, Ex-officio
Government of India Member
(o) The Commissioner for Archaeology and Museums, Government of Ex-officio
Karnataka Member
(p) The Chief Priest Chandraguthi Shree Renukamba Temple, Ex-officio
Shivamogga Member
(q) The Secretary of the Authority Ex-officio
member
Secretary
4. Term of office and conditions of services.- (1) Subject to the pleasure
of the State Government the non-official members nominated by the State
Government shall hold office for a period of three years.
(2) Any non-official member may resign his office by writing under his hand
addressed to the State Government but shall continue in office until his resignation
is accepted.
(3) The non-official members shall receive such allowances as may be
prescribed.
5. Disqualification for membership.- A person shall be disqualified for
being appointed as and for being a member if he,-
(a) has been convicted and sentenced to imprisonment for an offence which in the
opinion of the State Government involves moral turpitude; or
(b) is of mental illness and stands so declared by a competent court; or
(c) is an undischarged insolvent; or
(d) has been removed or dismissed from service of the Central Government or a State
Government or a body or corporation owned or controlled by the Central
Government or a State Government; or
(e) has directly or indirectly by himself or as partner, has any share or interest in any
work done by the order of the Authority or in any contract or employment with or
under or by or on behalf of the Authority; or
(f) is employed as a paid legal practitioner on behalf of the Authority or accepts
employment as legal practitioner against the Authority:
Provided that, no person shall be disqualified under clause (e) or be deemed
to have any share or interest in any contract or employment within the meaning of
the said clause by reason only of his having a share or interest in any newspaper
in which any advertisement relating to the affairs of the Authority is inserted.
6. Removal of member.-The State Government shall remove a member if,-
25
(a) he becomes subject to any of the disqualifications mentioned in section 5:
Provided that, no member shall be removed on the ground that he has
become subject to the disqualification mentioned in clause (e) of section 5, unless
he has been given an opportunity of making his representation against the
proposal; or
(b) he refuses to act or become incapable of acting; or
(c) he without informing the Authority absents from three consecutive meetings of the
Authority; or
(d) in the opinion of the State Government he has so abused his position as to render
his continuance in office detrimental to the public interest:
Provided that, no member shall be removed under this clause unless he has
been given an opportunity of making his representation against the proposal.
7. Eligibility for reappointment.- Any person ceasing to be a member shall
unless disqualified under section 5, be eligible for re-appointment as a member.
8. Powers of the Authority.- (1) The Authority shall have power generally to
do anything that in its opinion is necessary to do so in the intent and provisions of
this Act, except such acts as are specifically laid in the Act to be performed by other
authorities.
(2) Without prejudice to the generality of sub-section (1), the Authority shall
have power to enter into and perform all such contracts as it may consider
necessary or expedient for carrying out any of the purposes of this Act subject to
such rules made under this Act and every contract shall be made on behalf of the
Authority by the Secretary:
Provided that, a copy of every contract involving expenditure of rupees ten
lakhs or more shall be sent to the State Government.
(3) A compliance report shall be submitted by the Authority to the State
Government in this behalf.
(4) The Authority may approve a scheme for adoption of "C" category temples
as notified under the provisions of the Karnataka Hindu Religious Institutions and
Charitable Endowments Act, 1997 and may specify necessary provisions for the
said adoption.
(5) The Authority shall mandatorily comply with the provisions of the
Karnataka Hindu Religious Institutions and Charitable Endowments Act, 1997
(Karnataka Act 33 of 2001).
9. Sub-committee of the Authority.- (1) The Authority may for any specific
purpose constitute a sub- committee consisting of the Secretary as Chairman and
such other members not exceeding five among the members of the Authority.
(2) The sub-committee shall exercise such powers and perform such duties
of the Authority as delegated by the Authority.
26
(3) The sub-committee shall meet at-least once in a month and shall observe
such rules of procedure into the transaction of business at its meeting as may be
provided by regulations.
10. Appointment of Secretary.- (1) The State Government shall appoint a
Group 'B' officer of the Department of Endowment, Government of Karnataka, as
the Secretary of the Authority.
(2) The Secretary and other officers shall receive such salary and other
allowances as the State Government may, from time to time, determine.
(3) The State Government may, from time to time, grant leave of absence to
the Secretary for such period as it thinks fit.
11. Powers and duties of the Secretary.- (1) The Secretary shall be the
Chief Executive and Administrative Officer of the Authority.
(2) The Secretary shall, in addition to performing such functions as are
conferred on him by or under this Act or under any law for the time being in force,-
(a) carry into effect the resolutions of the Authority;
(b) conduct the business of the Authority and keep correspondence;
(c) carry out and execute such schemes and works as the State Government may direct
and incur necessary expenditure there for;
(d) implement the schemes of the Authority;
(e) operate the accounts of the Authority and be responsible for the maintenance of the
accounts of the Authority;
(f) exercise supervision and control over the officers and employees of the Authority in
matters of executive, administration and service conditions of such officers and
employees and regulation of their pay and allowances;
(g) furnish to the State Government a copy of the minutes of the proceedings of the
Authority and any return, or other information which the State Government may,
from time to time, call for; and
(h) discharge such other functions which are conferred on him by or under this Act or
any other law for the time being in force.
12. Employees of the Authority.-(1) Subject to such procedure and
conditions as may be prescribed, the Authority may appoint such number of
employees as it may find necessary for effective implementation of the Act:
Provided that, until the State Government frame rules, under this Act, the
method of recruitment and conditions of service of the employees including
Archaks working in Chandraguthi Shree Renukamba Temple of the Authority shall
be continued to be governed under the provisions of the Hindu Religious and
Charitable Endowments Act, 1997 (Karnataka Act 33 of 2001) and the rules made
there under:
27
Provided further that, the State Government shall appoint an Assistant
Engineer on deputation from the Public Works Department for maintenance of
works taken up by the Authority and the State Government shall also appoint an
Advisor of Finance and Accounts not below the rank of Auditor (First Division
Assistant) on deputation from the Karnataka State Audit and Accounts Department
and other officers from other Departments as may be necessary.
(2) The Assistant Engineer shall be responsible for the overall monitoring of
progress review of repair works, policy decisions, introduction of new technology,
Budget allocation, review of budget, co-ordination with all external agencies and
random site inspection for quality check and issuances of No Objection Certificate
to construction or renovations of the buildings coming under jurisdiction of the
Authority and report the same to the Secretary.
(3) The Auditor shall work under the control of the Secretary. He shall ensure
that financial rules are followed and accounts are kept up to date, presenting a
true and fair picture of the financial affairs of the Authority.
(4) The salaries, allowances and other conditions of service of the employees
referred to in sub-section (1), shall be such as may be prescribed.
(5) The Secretary shall be the appointing and disciplinary authority in respect
of employees of the Authority and shall exercise general control and supervision
over the employees of the Authority.
13. General disqualification for services under the Authority.- No person
who has directly or indirectly by himself or through his partner or through his
agent, any share or interest in any contract, by or on behalf of the Authority or in
any employment under, by or on behalf of the Authority, otherwise than as an
officer or employee thereof, shall become or remain an officer or employee of the
Authority.
14. Meetings of the Authority.- (1) Meetings of the Authority shall be
convened by the Secretary, with the previous approval of the Chairman at such
intervals as the Chairman may deem fit and shall be held at such place, as may be
determined by the Chairman:
Provided that, the Authority shall meet at least four times in a calendar year.
(2) Every meeting shall be presided over by the Chairman and if for any
reason the Chairman is unable to attend any meeting and if such a meeting is
attended by the Vice-Chairmen, the District incharge Minister shall preside over
the meeting. The quorum for the meeting shall be one third of the total members
including the Chairman.
(3) Decisions of the Authority shall be, by unanimous affirmative vote of the
members present and voting. If there is any difference of opinion on any particular
subject coming for decision before the Authority. The Secretary shall refer the
matter to the State Government and the decision of the State Government in such
matters shall be final and conclusive.
28
(4) The Secretary shall give effect to the decisions of the Authority:
Provided that, if in the opinion of the Secretary any resolution of the
Authority contravenes any provision of this Act or any other law or of any rule,
notification or regulation made or issued under this Act or any other law or of any
order passed by the State Government or is prejudicial or detrimental to the
interests of the Authority or the interests of the development and maintenance of
Chandraguthi Shree Renukamba Kshetra, he shall within fifteen days of the
passing of the resolution, refer the matter to the State Government for orders
thereon and inform the Authority at its next meeting, of the action taken by him
and until orders of the State Government on receipt of such reference the Secretary
shall not be bound to give effect to such resolution.
(5) The Authority may by regulations specify the procedure with regard to the
transaction of business at its meetings, not inconsistent with the provisions of this
Act and the provisions of the Karnataka Hindu Religious Institutions and
Charitable Endowments Act, 1997 (Karnataka Act 33 of 2001) and the Karnataka
Hindu Religious Institutions and Charitable Endowments Rules, 2002.
15. Proceedings presumed to be good and valid.- No disqualification of or
defect in the appointment of any person acting as member shall be deemed to
vitiate any act or proceeding of the Authority if such act or proceeding is otherwise
in accordance with the provisions of this Act.
16. Decisions of the Authority by circulation of note.- (1) The Chairman
may direct that any case may, instead of being brought up for discussion at a
meeting of the Authority, be circulated, amongst the members of the Authority for
opinion. If all the members unanimously agree for the proposal contained in the
note circulated, it shall be deemed to be affirmative decision of the Authority and
further action taken accordingly. If there is any difference of opinion on any
particular subject taken up for the decision of the Authority by circulation, the
Secretary shall refer the matter to the State Government and the decision of the
State Government thereon shall be final.
(2) In cases which are circulated for opinion under sub-section (1), if any
member fails to communicate his opinion to the Secretary by a date to be specified
in the note, it shall be presumed that such member has accepted the proposal
contained in the note circulated.
(3) The provisions relating to the meeting of the Authority under section 14
shall mutatis mutandis apply to the decisions of the Authority by circulation under
this section.
(4) The note for circulation under sub-section (1), shall include such
contents as may be prescribed.
17. Power of the Chairman to take decisions of the Authority in certain
cases.- (1) Where the Chairman is of the opinion that a matter is so urgent that it
cannot wait for the Authority meeting under section 14 or for a Authority decision,
29
by circulation under section 16, he may pass such orders as he may deem fit and
it shall be implemented in the manner, the decisions of the Authority are
implemented under sections 14 and 16.
(2) Every decision taken by the Chairman under this section shall be reported
to the Authority at its next meeting for ratification.
(3) If the Authority disagrees with the decision of the Chairman the same
shall be referred to the Government by the Secretary for suitable order.
CHAPTER III
DEVELOPMENT AND MAINTENANCE OF THE KSHETHRA
18. District Level and State Level Monitoring Committee.- (1) There shall
be constituted a District level committee and a State level Monitoring committee to
review and submit the proposal regarding construction and maintenance of
buildings, roads and tunnels, electricity supply and maintenance, water supply
and sanitation, construction of recreation centre and libraries to provide necessary
facilities to pilgrims and to provide safety to pilgrims within the jurisdiction of the
Authority.
(2) The District level committee shall consist of the following members,
namely:-
(a) The Deputy Commissioner of Shivamogga Ex-officio
Chairperson
(b) The e Superintendent of Police, Shivamogga Ex-officio member
(c) The Chief Executive Officers, Zilla Panchayat, Shivamogga Ex-officio member
(d) The District Forest Officer, Shivamogga Ex-officio member
(e) The Superintending Engineer, Public Works Department, Ex-officio member
Shivamogga
(f) The Commissioner for Archaeology and Museums, Ex-officio member
Government of Karnataka, Mysuru
(g) The Superintendent Department for Archaeology and Ex-officio member
Museums, Shivamogga circle
(h) The jurisdictional Assistant Director of Town and Country Ex-officio member
planning Department.
(i) The Assistant Commissioner of Sagara sub-division Ex-officio member
(j) The Tahsildar of Sorabha Taluk Ex-officio member
(k) The Executive Officer of Sorabha Taluk Panchayat Ex-officio member
(l) The Assistant Director, Tourism Department Ex-officio member
(m)The Chief priest, Chandraguthi Shree Renukamba Temple Ex-officio member
30
(n) The Secretary of the Authority Ex-officio member
Secretary
(o) The Panchayath Development officer Gramapanchayath, Ex-officio member
Chandraguthi
(3) The District Level Committee shall submit suitable proposals to the State
Level Monitoring Committee for the works or proposals to be undertaken within the
jurisdiction of the Authority.
(4) The State Level Monitaring Committee shall consist of the following
members, namely:-
(a) The Principal Secretary to Government, Revenue Ex-officio
Department (Muzrai) Chairperson
(b) The Secretary to Government Forest and Ecology Ex-officio member
Department or his representative not below the rank of
Deputy Secretary.
(c) The Commissioner, Hindu Religious Institutions and Ex-officio member
Charitable Endowment Department
(d) The Chief Engineer, Public Works Department Ex-officio
member
(e) The Managing Director, Mangalore Electricity Supply Ex-officio member
Company
(f) The Chief Engineer, Karnataka Urban Water Supply and Ex-officio member
Sewerage Board
(g) The Deputy Commissioner, Shivamogga Ex-officio member
(h) The Superintendent of Police, Shivamogga Ex-officio member
(i) The Chief Executive Officer, Zilla Panchayat Shivamogga Ex-officio member
(j) The Regional Director for Archaeology and Museums, Ex-officio member
Government of India
(k) The Commissioner for Archaeology and Museums, Ex-officio member
Government of Karnataka, Mysuru
(l) The Deputy Director, Tourism Department Ex-officio member
(m)The Secretary of the Authority Ex-officio member
Secretary
(5) The State level Monitoring Committee shall monitor the proposals
submitted by the District level Committee and direct the Authority on all matters
concerning to development of Chandraguthi Shree Renukamba Kshetra.
31
(6) The District level Committee and the State level Monitoring Committee
shall meet at least once in six months at such place and at such time and with
such procedure as may be prescribed.
19. Provision with regard to the movable and immovable properties of
the Temple.- (1) Notwithstanding anything contained in any custom, usage or the
provisions of any law for the time being in force under which Shree Chandraguthi
Renukamba temple is governed or the provisions of the Karnataka Hindu Religious
institutions and Charitable Endowments Act, 1997 (Karnataka Act 33 of 2001), the
ownership, administration and complete management of movable and immovable
properties including jewellery and liabilities of the temple shall vest with the State
Government from the date of commencement of this Act and shall be transferred
to the Authority thereafter.
(2) Subject to the provisions of sub section(1) of section 12, on and from the
date of commencement of this Act the management of the employees of the temple
shall vest in the Authority.
(3) It shall be competent for the State Government, by order to make
transitory provisions, if in the opinion of the State Government, it is expedient so
to do.
20. Preparation of developmental plan, its approval and execution.-(1)
The Authority shall, as soon as may be, after its constitution prepare a plan for the
development of Chandraguthi Shree Renukamba Kshetra into an international
pilgrim, cultural and tourist centre and a centre for deliberation and propagation
of the tenets of Chandraguthi Shree Renukamba and other subsidiary deities. The
Development plan may include,-
(a) the Chandraguthi Shree Renukamba Temple programmes for its maintenance and
other temple attached to the presiding deity;
(b) proposals for acquiring land by acquisition or purchase, exchange or otherwise,
which in the opinion of the Authority is necessary for execution of the development
plan;
(c) putting up public parks, horticultural or zoological gardens, fountain gardens,
artificial water falls, game parks, lakes with boating or other water games or such
other tourist attractions;
(d) construction of choultries, lodging houses, cottages, hotels, restaurants and
boarding houses to cater to different classes of tourists;
(e) construction of necessary chain of shops or shopping complexes;
(f) construction of prayer halls and meditation halls at strategic places;
(g) provision of amenities as defined in clause (a) of section 2;
(h) laying and relaying of all or any land including, construction and reconstruction of
buildings;
(i) provision of drainage, electricity and water supply and sanitation;
(j) raising any land which the Authority may consider expedient to raise to facilitate its
plan of action in general and better drainage in particular;
(k) forming open spaces for the better ventilation of the area comprised in the
Chandraguthi Shree Renukamba Temple or in any adjoining area;
(l) the demolition of all buildings unfit for human habitation and not fitting into the
developmental plan;
32
(m) the demolition of obstructive building or portions of buildings;
(n) the construction and reconstruction of buildings, their maintenance and
preservation;
(o) the sale, letting or exchange of any property comprised in the scheme, subject to
the provisions of section 29;
(p) prohibition of ear buds with plastic sticks, plastic sticks for balloons, plastic flags,
candy sticks, ice cream sticks, polystyrene (Thermocol) for decoration, plates, cups,
glasses, cutlery such as forks, spoons, knives, straw, trays, wrapping or packing
films around sweet boxes, invitation cards and cigarette packets, plastic or PVC
banners less than 100 micron, stirrers in the area of the Authority for avoiding the
plastic pollution;
(q) ensuring availability of safe and secure water and sanitation facilities for all,
throughout the year, in the area of the Authority;
(r) provision of facilities for communication and transport with parking facilities;
(s) such adjustments and agreements with the existing religious institutions in the
geographical area of developmental plan which can be allowed to continue so long
as they fit into the scheme of the developmental plan; and
(t) any other matter for which in the opinion of the Authority, it is expedient and
incidental to make provision with a view to develop and maintain Chandraguthi
Shree Renukamba Kshetra as a cultural centre, place of pilgrimage and an
international tourist centre and a centre for deliberation and to protect and develop
other places of importance connected with Chandraguthi Shree Renukamba
Temple.
(2) The development plan prepared under sub-section (1), shall be forwarded
by the Secretary to the State Government for information. The State Government
may approve the plan with or without any modifications.
(3) After approval of the development plan under sub-section (2), the State
Government may, on the recommendations of the Authority make such
modifications to the plan as it deems necessary, from time to time.
(4) The Authority shall have power to undertake works and incur expenditure
for execution of development plans approved by the State Government in
accordance with the provisions of the Karnataka Transparency in Public
Procurement Act, 1999 (Karnataka
Act 29 of 2000).
21. Subsequent development works.- After execution of the development
plan under section 20, the Authority may, from time to time, make and take up
any new additional development schemes, out of its own or borrowed financial
resources or funds from the State Government.
22. Maintenance of Chandraguthi Shree Renukamba Kshetra.-The State
Government may by rules on the recommendation of the Authority or otherwise
shall make provision for the maintenance of Chandraguthi Shree Renukamba
Kshetra which shall include the manner in which the properties of the Authority
including Chandraguthi Shree Renukamba Kshetra can be managed, the rates,
fees or other charges that can be collected from the devotees, pilgrims, tourists and
other visitors to Chandraguthi Shree RenukambaKshetra for the various facilities
that they may make use of in Chandraguthi Shree Renukamba Kshetra and for
33
such other matters as may be expedient like power to levy license fee as may be
determined by the Authority from the licensee or persons in possession of the
properties of Chandraguthi Shree Renukamba Kshetra.
23. Delegation of powers.- (1) The State Government, may by notification,
delegate any of the powers conferred on it by or under this Act, to any other
authority, except the power to make rules under section 37.
(2) The Authority may by regulations, delegate any of the powers conferred
on it by or under this Act to the Secretary or other officers of the Authority, except
the power to make regulations under section 38.
24. Application of the Karnataka Public Premises (Eviction of
unauthorized occupants) Act, 1974 (Karnataka Act 32 of 1974) to the
Authority Premises.-(1) The State Government. may by notification provide from
such date as may be specified in such notification that the Karnataka Public
Premises (Eviction of Unauthorised Occupants) Act, 1974 shall apply to premises
belonging to, vesting in, or leased by, the Authority as that Act applies in relation
to public premises but subject to the provisions of sub-section (2).
(2) On a notification being issued under sub-section (1), the aforesaid Act,
and the rules made thereunder shall apply to the premises of the Authority with
the following modifications, namely:-
(a) The State Government may appoint any officer of the State Government
or the Authority as it thinks fit, to be the competent officer for the purposes of the
aforesaid Acts;
(b) References to "public premises" in that Act and those rules shall be
deemed to be references to premises of the Authority, and references to "the State
Government in sections 6,8,14,16 and 17 of that Act shall be deemed to be
references to the Authority.
CHAPTER-IV
AUDIT AND ACCOUNTS, BUDGET AND FUND
25. Fund of the Authority.- (1) There shall be a Fund called Chandraguthi
Shree Renukamba Kshetra Development Authority Fund.
(2) There shall be credited to the said Fund,-
(i) all grants, subventions, donations and gifts made by the Central
Government, State Government, any local authority or anybody, whether
incorporated or not or any person; and
(ii) the amount borrowed by the Authority:
Provided that, the donations, Kanikes, Seva Fees and other offering made to
God in Hundi shall be credited to the fund of the Authority and out of which the
net income of that temple the authority shall contribute to the common pool fund
created under section 17 of the Karnataka Hindu Religious and Charitable
Endowments Act, 1997 (Karnataka Act 33 of 2001) at such rate as specified in the
said section.
34
(3) Except as otherwise directed by the State Government all moneys credited
to the Fund shall be invested in any Scheduled Bank or in the State Government
Treasury.
(4) The administrative expenses of the Authority including the salaries,
allowances and pension if any payable to the Secretary and other officer and
employees of the Authority shall be defrayed out of the fund of the Authority.
26. Application of the Fund.- The Fund and all property held or vested in
the Authority shall be applied for carrying out the purposes of this Act.
27. Grant by the State Government.- The State Government shall every
year make a grant to the Authority of a sum equivalent to the administrative
expenses of the Authority, until the Authority reaches self maintenance stage out
of its own resources.
28. Budget of the Authority.- (1) The Authority shall prepare every year,
before such date and in such form as may be prescribed, a budget estimate of its
income and expenditure for the financial year to commence on the first day of April
next following and shall forward it to the State Government for sanction. The
Authority may also prepare supplementary Budget Estimates, during the course of
any financial year, if necessary.
(2) The State Government shall approve the Budget Estimates and
Supplementary Budget Estimates with or without modifications.
(3) In cases of extreme urgency, the Secretary shall be competent to incur
expenditure not exceeding twenty five lakhs rupees in a financial year,
notwithstanding the fact that such expenditure has not been included in the
annual or Supplementary Budget Estimate approved by the State Government
under sub-section (2).
(4) The Secretary shall also have power to re-appropriate funds from one unit
of expenditure to another unit, subject to a maximum of rupees ten lakh at a time.
29. Accounts and audit.- (1) The Secretary shall cause to be maintained
such books of accounts and other registers as may be prescribed and shall prepare
in the prescribed manner an annual statement of accounts.
(2) The financial year of the Authority shall commence on 1st April of each
calendar year and shall end on 31st March of the succeeding calendar year.
(3) The accounts of the Authority shall be audited annually by the Chief
Controller, State Audit and Accounts Department. The Authority or the State
Government may order concurrent and special audits also.
(4) The auditor shall, for the purposes of the audit, have access to all the
accounts and other records of the Authority.
(5) As soon as may be after the receipt of the annual statement of accounts
and the report of the auditor, the Authority shall consider it in its meeting and send
a copy of the annual statement of accounts together with a copy of the report of the
auditor to the State Government, along with its explanation on the comments made
by the auditor, if any, and a statement of action taken by the Authority to remedy
the irregularities or loopholes, if any pointed out by the auditor.
(6) The State Government may after perusal of the report of the auditor, and
other documents submitted to the Authority as in sub-section (5), give such
35
directions as it thinks fit to the Authority and the Authority shall comply with such
directions.
30. Reports.- (1) The Authority shall prepare an Annual Report of its working
for each financial year and submit it to the State Government along with other
reports under section 29.
(2) The Authority shall before such date, in such form and at such intervals
as may be prescribed, submit such reports to the State Government.
(3) The audit report and annual report of the authority shall be laid before
State Legislature by the State Government.
CHAPTER-V
MISCELLANEOUS
31. Certain persons to be public servants.- All members, officers and
servants of the Authority, shall be deemed, when acting or purporting to act in
pursuance of any of the provisions of this Act, to be public servants within the
meaning of section 2(28) of Bharatiya Nyaya Sanhita 2023 (Central Act 45 of 2023).
32. Protection of action taken in good faith.- No suit, prosecution or other
legal proceeding shall lie against any person for anything which is in good faith
done or purported to be done under this Act.
33. Default in performance of duty.- (1) If the State Government is satisfied
that the Authority has made default in performing any duty imposed on it by or
under this Act, it may fix a period for the performance of that duty.
(2) If in the opinion of the State Government, the Authority fails or neglects
to perform such duty within the period so fixed for its performance, it shall be
lawful for the State Government, notwithstanding anything contained in section 3
to supersede and reconstitute the Authority in the prescribed manner.
(3) After the super session of the Authority and until it is reconstituted, the
powers, duties and functions of the Authority under this Act shall be carried on by
the State Government or by such officer or officers, as the State Government may
appoint for this purpose.
34. Dissolution of the Authority.- (1) The State Government may, by
notification, declare that with effect from such date as may be specified in the
notification, the Authority shall be dissolved:
Provided that, no such dissolution shall be made by the State Government
unless, a resolution to that effect has been moved in and passed by both Houses
of the State Legislature,
(2) With effect from the date specified in the notification under sub-section
(1),-
(a) all properties, funds and dues which are vested in and realisable by the
Authority shall vest in and be realisable by the State Government; and
(b) all liabilities endorsable against the Authority shall be endorsable against
Chandraguthi Shree Renukamba temple to the extent of the properties, funds and
dues vested in and realised by Chandraguthi Shree Renukamba temple.
36
35. Control by the State Government.- (1) The State Government shall
have general administrative control and supervision over all the activities and
affairs of the Authority.
(2) The State Government may call for the records of any proceedings of the
Authority, the Secretary or any officer subordinate to the Authority, for the purpose
of satisfying itself as to the correctness, legality or propriety of such proceedings
and may pass such order with respect thereto in accordance with the provisions of
the Act:
Provided that, no order shall be passed or modified or annulled by the
Government unless a reasonable opportunity is afforded to the persons who are
affected by the order of the Government.
36. Power of the State Government to give directions.- The State
Government may give such directions to the Authority as in its opinion are
necessary or expedient for carrying out the purpose of this Act and it shall be the
duty of the Authority, to comply with such directions
37. Power to make rules.- (1) The State Government may, by notification
make rules to carry out the purposes of this Act.
(2) Every rule made under this Act shall be laid as soon as may be after it is
made, before each House of the State Legislature while it is in session, for a total
period of thirty days which may be comprised in one session or in two or more
successive sessions and if before the expiry of the session immediately following
the session or the successive sessions aforesaid, both Houses agree in making any
modification in the rule or both Houses agree that the rule should not be made,
the rule shall, from the date on which the modification or annulment is notified
have effect only in such modified form or be of no effect as the case may be; so,
however, that any such modification or annulment shall be without, prejudice to
the validity of anything previously done under that rule.
38. Power to make regulations.- The Authority may subject to the
provisions of this Act and the rules made under section 37 and with the previous
sanction of the State Government, by notification make regulations to carry out the
purposes of this Act.
39. Over riding effect of the Act.- Notwithstanding any compromise,
agreement scheme, judgment decree or order of the court or other authority or any
custom, usage governing Chandraguthi Shree Renukamba temple, the provisions
of the Karnataka Hindu Religious Institutions and Charitable Endowments Act,
1997 (Karnataka Act 33 of 2001) and the Karnataka Hindu Religious Institutions
and Charitable Endowments Rules 2002, shall prevail in so far as they relate to
religious practices of Chandraguthi Shree Renukamba temple, Chandraguthi,
which will remain as notified institution under the provisions of the Karnataka
Hindu Religious Institutions and Charitable Endowments
Act, 1997 (Karnataka Act 33 of 2001) even after the commencement of this Act.
40. Consequences of constitution of the Authority.- Notwithstanding
anything contained in this Act with effect from the date the Authority is constituted
under this Act, such authority shall be the local planning authority for the local
planning area comprising Chandraguthi Shree RenukambaKshetra and it shall
exercise the powers, discharge the functions and perform the duties under this Act
R.N.I. No. KARBIL/2001/47147 POSTAL REGN. No. RNP/KA/BGS/2202/2017-19
Licensed to post without prepayment WPP No. 297 37
as if it were a local planning authority constituted for Chandraguthi Shree
RenukambaKshetra.
41. Power to remove difficulty.- (1) If any difficulty arises in giving effect to
the provisions of this Act, the State Government may, by notification, make such
provisions not inconsistent with the provisions of this Act and the provisions of the
Karnataka Hindu Religious Institutions and Charitable Endowments Act of
1997(Karnataka Act 33 of 2001) as appears to it be necessary or expedient for
removing the difficulty.
(2) The provisions made by any notification under sub-section (1) shall have
effect as if enacted in this Act and any such notification may be made so as to be
retrospective to any date not earlier than the appointed day.
The above translation of (cid:3284)ದ(cid:3187) (cid:3230)(cid:3423)(cid:3176) (cid:3663)(cid:3187) ೕ (cid:3594)(cid:3410)(cid:3197)ಂಬ (cid:3203)(cid:3193) ೕತ(cid:3187) ಅ(cid:3543)(cid:3652)(cid:3453)(cid:3179) (cid:3497)(cid:3187) (cid:3468)(cid:3197)ರ
ಅ(cid:3468)(cid:3483)ಯಮ, 2025 (2026ರ ಕ(cid:3482)(cid:4305)ಟಕ ಅ(cid:3468)(cid:3483)ಯಮ (cid:3704)(cid:3218)(cid:3186) : 16) be published in the official
Gazette under clause (3) of Article 348 of the constitution of India.
THAAWARCHAND GEHLOT
GOVERNOR OF KARANATAKA
By Order and in the name of
the Governor of Karnataka,
G. SRIDHAR
Secretary to Government
Department of Parliamentary
Affairs and Legislation
ಮುದ(cid:206)ಕರು (cid:178)ಾಗೂ ಪ(cid:206)(cid:144)ಾಶಕರು:- ಸಂಕಲ(cid:163)ಾ(cid:297)(cid:144)ಾ(cid:312)ಗಳ(cid:133), ಕ(cid:163)ಾ(cid:143)ಟಕ (cid:170)ಾಜ(cid:205)ಪತ(cid:206), ಸ(cid:144)ಾ(cid:143)(cid:312) (cid:144)ೇಂದ(cid:206) ಮುದ(cid:206)(cid:158)ಾಲಯ, (cid:166)ೆಂಗಳ(cid:136)ರು
