The Haryana Jan Vishwas (Amendment of Provisions) Act, 2025
Act No. 11 of 2026
DISCLAIMER: This document is being furnished to you for your information by PRS Legislative Research
(PRS). The contents of this document have been obtained from sources PRS believes to be reliable. These
contents have not been independently verified, and PRS makes no representation or warranty as to the accuracy,
completeness or correctness. In some cases the Principal Act and/or Amendment Act may not be available.
Principal Acts may or may not include subsequent amendments. For authoritative text, please contact the relevant
state department concerned or refer to the latest government publication or the gazette notification. Any person
using this material should take their own professional and legal advice before acting on any information contained
in this document. PRS or any persons connected with it do not accept any liability arising from the use of this
document. PRS or any persons connected with it shall not be in any way responsible for any loss, damage, or
distress to any person on account of any action taken or not taken on the basis of this document.
HARYANA GOVT. GAZ. (EXTRA.), JAN. 22, 2026 (MAGH. 2, 1947 SAKA) 45
PART-I
HARYANA GOVERNMENT
LAW AND LEGISLATIVE DEPARTMENT
Notification
The 22nd January, 2026
No. Leg. 11/2026.— The following Act of the Legislature of the State of Haryana
received the assent of the Governor of Haryana on the 12th January, 2026 and is hereby
published for general information:-
HARYANA ACT NO. 11 OF 2026
THE HARYANA JAN VISHWAS (AMENDMENT OF PROVISIONS) ACT, 2025
AN
ACT
to amend certain enactments for decriminalizing and rationalizing offences to further
enhance trust-based governance for ease of living and the ease of doing business.
Be it enacted by the Legislature of the State of Haryana in the Seventy-sixth Year of the
Republic of India as follows:-
1. (1) This Act may be called the Haryana Jan Vishwas (Amendment of Provisions) Act, 2025. Short title and
commencement.
(2) It shall be deemed to have come into force with effect from the 30th October, 2025.
2. The enactments mentioned in column (4) of the Schedule are hereby amended to the extent Amendment of
and in the manner mentioned in column (5) thereof. certain
enactments.
3. The penalties provided under various provisions in the enactments mentioned in the Modification of
Schedule shall be increased by ten per cent of the minimum amount of penalty provided thereof, penalties.
after the expiry of every three years from the date of commencement of this Act.
4. (1) No penalty shall be imposed by the competent authority in contravention of any Authority to
provision of the relevant enactment mentioned in the Schedule without following the principles of impose
penalty/hear
natural justice of hearing.
appeal.
Explanation.— For the purposes of this sub-section “competent authority” means such authority
as provided in the relevant enactment to be amended under this Act or in case
the competent authority is not provided in the enactment then an authority, as
may be specified by the Government/State Government, as the case may be.
(2) Any person aggrieved by an order of the competent authority may, within such
period, as may be specified from the date of the order, prefer an appeal to the appellate authority,
in such manner, as may be specified:
Provided that the appellate authority may entertain an appeal after the expiry of the said
specified period, if he is satisfied that the appellant was prevented by sufficient cause from filing
the appeal within the stipulated period.
Explanation.- For the purposes of this sub-section “appellate authority” means such authority
as may be specified by the Government/State Government, as the case may be.
5. The amount of penalty as imposed if not deposited, shall be liable to be recovered as an Recovery of
arrears of land revenue. penalty.
6. The amendment or repeal by this Act of any enactment shall not affect any other enactment Savings.
in which the amended or repealed enactment has been applied, incorporated or referred to;
and this Act shall not affect the validity, invalidity, effect or consequences of anything
already done or suffered, or any right, title, obligation or liability already acquired, accrued or
incurred or any remedy or proceeding in respect thereof, or any release or discharge of, or from
any debt, penalty, obligation, liability, claim or demand, or any indemnity already granted, or the
proof of any past act or thing;
46 HARYANA GOVT. GAZ. (EXTRA.), JAN. 22, 2026 (MAGH. 2, 1947 SAKA)
nor shall this Act affect any principle or rule of law, or established jurisdiction, form or
course of pleading, practice or procedure, or existing usage, custom, privilege, restriction,
exemption, office or appointment, notwithstanding that the same respectively may have been in
any manner affirmed, or recognised or derived by, in or from any enactment hereby amended or
repealed;
nor shall the amendment or repeal by this Act of any enactment revive or restore any
jurisdiction, office, custom, liability, right, title, privilege, restriction, exemption, usage, practice,
procedure or other matter or thing not now existing or in force.
Repeal and 7. (1) The Haryana Jan Vishwas (Amendment of Provisions) Ordinance, 2025 (Haryana
savings. Ordinance No. 2 of 2025), is hereby repealed.
(2) Notwithstanding such repeal, anything done or any action taken under the said
Ordinance shall be deemed to have been done or taken under this Act.
HARYANA GOVT. GAZ. (EXTRA.), JAN. 22, 2026 (MAGH. 2, 1947 SAKA) 47
SCHEDULE
Sr. No. Year No. Short title Amendment
1 2 3 4 5
1. 1872 Punjab The Haryana Laws 1. For section 42, the following section shall be
Act IV Act, 1872 substituted, namely:-
“42. Penalty for withholding assistance or
conniving or escape.- If such headman or watchman do
not forthwith give such assistance, or if the inhabitants of
such village do not afford full opportunity for search in
their houses for the offenders, or if, from the
circumstances of the case, there shall appear good reasons
to believe that the inhabitants of such village, or any of
them, were conniving at the offence or at the escape of the
offenders, and such offenders cannot be traced beyond the
village, the District Magistrate may impose a penalty
which may extend to fifty thousand rupees to such
inhabitants, who do not forthwith give assistance or to
connive or to help in escaping the offender.”.
2. For section 50B, the following section shall be
substituted, namely:-
“50B. Penalties for breach of rules.- If any person
contravenes the provisions of any rules made by the State
Government under this Act, he shall be liable to a penalty
which shall not be less than ten thousand rupees but may
extend to fifty thousand rupees.”.
2. 1883 Punjab The Haryana District For section 57, the following section shall be substituted,
Act 20 Boards Act, 1883 namely:-
“57. Penalty for infringement of regulations.- In case
of contravention of any regulation made under section 56,
a Board may determine that a breach of the same shall be
liable for a penalty which may extend to five thousand
rupees, and in the case of a continuing breach, with a
further penalty of one thousand rupees for every day
which may extend up to a maximum limit of twenty
thousand rupees during which the breach is continued:
Provided that the Deputy Commissioner shall
afford an opportunity of hearing to the offender before
imposing such penalty.”.
3. 1913 Punjab The Haryana Forest For clause (f) of sub-section (1) of section 3, the
Act 3 (Sale of Timber) Act, following clause shall be substituted, namely:-
1913 “(f) prescribe a penalty of fifty thousand rupees for
the infringement of any rule made under this section. In
case the breach is committed after sunset and before
sunrise, or after preparation for resistance to lawful
authority, or if the offender has been previously convicted
of a like offence, the penalty shall be double of the
amount of the penalty already imposed. Further, in case of
repeated breach, the penalty would be twice of the
penalty. The officer to take cognizance and realize penalty
would not be less than the rank of Deputy Range Forest
Officer.”.
48 HARYANA GOVT. GAZ. (EXTRA.), JAN. 22, 2026 (MAGH. 2, 1947 SAKA)
Sr. No. Year No. Short title Amendment
1 2 3 4 5
4. 1914 Punjab The Haryana Excise 1. For clause (a) of section 65, the following clause
Act I Act, 1914 shall be substituted, namely:-
“(a) fails willfully to produce such license,
permit or pass on the demand of any excise
officer or of any other officer duly
empowered to make such demand shall be
liable to a penalty which shall not be less
than ten thousand rupees but may extend to
one lakh rupees.”.
2. In section 70,-
(i) before the words “If an Excise Officer-”
the figure and signs “(1)” shall be added;
(ii) for the words and signs “he shall be liable
to imprisonment for a term which may
extend to three months, or with fine which
may extend to five hundred rupees or with
both”, the words and signs “shall be liable
to a penalty which may extend to one lakh
rupees, to be imposed by the Excise
Commissioner” shall be substituted;
(iii) after sub-section (1), the following sub-
section shall be added, namely:-
“(2) For the purpose of determining
penalties, Excise Commissioner may
summon and enforce the attendance of any
person acquainted with the facts and
circumstances of the case to give evidence
or to produce any documents, which in the
opinion of the Excise Commissioner, may
be useful for or relevant to the subject
matter and if he is satisfied that the officer
concerned has contravened the provisions
of sub-section (1), he may impose such
penalty as he thinks fit:
Provided that no such penalty
shall be imposed without giving the
concerned excise officer a reasonable
opportunity of being heard.”.
3. After section 70, the following section shall be
inserted, namely:-
“70A. Appeal.- (1) Any person aggrieved by an
order passed under section 70, may prefer an appeal within
a period of sixty days from the date of receipt of such order
to the appellate authority, as may be specified:
Provided that the appellate authority may entertain
an appeal after the expiry of the said period of sixty days,
if he is satisfied that the appellant was prevented by
sufficient cause from filing the appeal within the
stipulated period.
(2) The appellate authority may, after giving the
parties to the appeal an opportunity of being heard, pass
such order, as it may think fit.
(3) An appeal under sub-section (1) shall be
disposed of within a period of one hundred and eighty
(180) days from the date of filing of appeal.”.
HARYANA GOVT. GAZ. (EXTRA.), JAN. 22, 2026 (MAGH. 2, 1947 SAKA) 49
Sr. No. Year No. Short title Amendment
1 2 3 4 5
5. 1938 Punjab The Haryana For sub-section (3) of section 4, the following sub-section
Act 3 Registration of shall be substituted, namely:-
Money Lender’s Act,
“(3) Any money lender who contravenes the
1938
provisions of sub-section (2) shall be liable to a penalty of
fifty thousand rupees for first violation. In case of
subsequent violation, the penalty imposed shall be double
of the penalty imposed for first violation.”.
6. 1948 East The Haryana For section 38, the following section shall be substituted,
Punjab Holdings namely:-
Act 50 (Consolidation and
“38. Penalties.- If any person willfully destroys,
Prevention of
injures, or without lawful authority removes any survey
Fragmentation) Act,
mark, he may be ordered by a Consolidation Officer to
1948
pay such penalty, as may in the opinion of that officer be
necessary, to defray the expenses of restoring the same
and of rewarding the person, if any, who gave information
of the destruction, injury, or removal. In addition to the
recovery of such expenses, the Consolidation Officer may
also impose a penalty which may extend to ten thousand
rupees for each survey mark so destroyed, injured, or
removed.”.
7. 1949 East The Haryana Control 1. For section 6, the following section shall be
Punjab of Bricks Supplies substituted, namely:-
Act 1 Act, 1949
“6. Penalties.- If any person contravenes any order
made under section 3, he shall be liable to a penalty as
may be specified by the competent authority.”.
2. In section 9, for the words “he shall be punishable
with imprisonment for a term which may extend to three
years or with fine or with both”, the words “he shall be
liable to a penalty as may be specified by the competent
authority” shall be substituted.
3. Sections 10, 11 and 12 shall be omitted.
8. 1953 Punjab The Haryana 1. For section 11, the following section shall be
Act 10 Security of Land substituted, namely:-
Tenures Act, 1953
“11. Tenant’s right to water.- Save in proportion to
a reduction in the tenancy, if any, a land owner shall not
be competent to curtail or terminate the supply of canal or
use of well water enjoyed by a tenant immediately before
the commencement of this Act, and a breach of this
provision shall be liable to a penalty of twenty thousand
rupees for first violation. In case of subsequent violation,
the penalty imposed shall be double of the penalty
imposed for first violation.”.
2. For sub-section (2) of section 14, the following
sub-section shall be substituted, namely:-
“(2) Any landowner who fails to give such receipt
shall be liable to a penalty of five thousand rupees.”.
50 HARYANA GOVT. GAZ. (EXTRA.), JAN. 22, 2026 (MAGH. 2, 1947 SAKA)
Sr. No. Year No. Short title Amendment
1 2 3 4 5
9. 1953 Punjab The Haryana For section 9, the following section shall be substituted,
Act 40 Sugarcane namely:-
(Regulation of “9. Penalties.- If any person contravenes any of the
Purchase and provisions of this Act or of any rules made thereunder, he
Supply) Act, 1953 shall be liable to a penalty which shall not be less than
twenty-five thousand rupees but may extend to fifty
thousand rupees for the first violation, one lakh rupees for
the subsequent violation and in case the violation still
continues then the licence shall be suspended for a
maximum period of one year.”.
10. 1958 Punjab The Haryana For section 32, the following section shall be substituted,
Act 2 Warehouses Act, namely:-
1957 “32. Penalty and procedure.- (1) Whoever-
(a) acts or holds himself out, as a licensed
warehouseman without having obtained a
license under this Act; or
(b) knowingly contravenes or fails to comply with
any of the provisions or requirements of this Act
or the rules made thereunder,
shall be liable to a penalty which may extend to five lakh
rupees.
(2) Where a person contravenes the provisions of
sub-section (1) is a company or an association or a body
of persons whether incorporated or not, the manager,
secretary, agent or other principal officer, managing the
affairs of such company, association or body shall be deemed
to have contravened the provisions of sub-section (1).”.
11. 1963 Punjab The Haryana Land For section 20, the following section shall be substituted,
Act 23 Improvement namely:-
Schemes Act, 1963 “20 Penalties.- Any person, who does any act
which causes damage to any of the works carried out or
maintained under any scheme which has come into force
under section 11, shall be liable to a penalty which shall
not be less than twenty-five thousand rupees but may
extend to fifty thousand rupees. In case he fails to pay the
penalty shall be debarred from getting the benefits of
departmental schemes for a period of two years.”.
12. 1971 20 The Haryana 1. For section 76, the following section shall be
Housing Board Act, substituted, namely:-
1971 “76. Penalty for contravention of bye-laws.-
Whosoever contravenes any bye-law made under section
75 shall be liable for a penalty which may extend to fifty
thousand rupees.”.
2. In section 77, for the words and signs “he shall, on
conviction, be punished with imprisonment for a term
which may extend to one month or with fine which may
extend to five hundred rupees or with both”, the words
“he shall be liable to a penalty of fifty thousand rupees”
shall be substituted.
HARYANA GOVT. GAZ. (EXTRA.), JAN. 22, 2026 (MAGH. 2, 1947 SAKA) 51
Sr. No. Year No. Short title Amendment
1 2 3 4 5
13. 1972 24 The Haryana Public For section 11, the following section shall be substituted,
Premises and Land namely:-
(Eviction and Rent “11. Penalties.- (1) If any person who has been
Recovery) Act, 1972 evicted from any public premises under this Act again
occupies the premises without authority for such
occupation, he shall be liable to a penalty of one lakh
rupees and for each repeated occupation, the penalty
imposed shall be double of the penalty imposed for first
violation.
(2) The competent authority imposing a penalty
on a person under sub-section (1) shall make an order for
evicting that person summarily and he shall be liable to
such eviction without prejudice to any other action that
may be taken against him under this Act.”.
14. 1972 26 The Haryana Ceiling For section 21, the following section shall be substituted,
on Land Holding namely:-
Act, 1972 “21. Penalties for making false statement.- (1) If
any person fails to furnish a declaration as required by
section 9, or during the course of any proceedings under
this Act makes a declaration or statement or furnishes any
information which is false, or which he knows or has
reason to believe to be false, or which he does not believe
to be true, shall be liable to a penalty of fifty thousand
rupees.
(2) If any person secures an allotment by furnishing
information which is false or which he knows or has
reason to believe to be false or which he does not believe
to be true shall be liable to a penalty of fifty thousand
rupees:
Provided that the imposition of a penalty under this
section shall not be a bar for prosecution under the
provisions of the Bharatiya Nyaya Sanhita, 2023 (Central
Act 45 of 2023) or any other law for time being in force.”.
15. 1973 35 The Haryana In section 23, for the words “shall be punishable with a
Requisitioning and fine which may extend to one thousand rupees”, the words
Acquisition of “shall be liable to a penalty which may extend to one
Immovable Property thousand rupees” shall be substituted.
Act, 1973
16. 1973 24 The Haryana 1. In sub-section (2) of section 86, for the words
Municipal Act, 1973 “punishable with a fine”, the words “liable to a penalty”
shall be substituted.
2. For sub-section (5) of section 87, the following
sub-section shall be substituted, namely:-
“(5) Whoever contravenes the provisions of sub-
sections (1) and (3) shall in addition to any other penalty
which he incurs through such neglect, be liable to a
penalty which shall not be less than twenty-five rupees but
may extend to two hundred rupees, and in the case of a
continuing breach, with a further penalty of ten rupees for
every day during which the breach continues.”.
3. For sub-section (2) of section 127, the following
sub-section shall be substituted, namely:-
52 HARYANA GOVT. GAZ. (EXTRA.), JAN. 22, 2026 (MAGH. 2, 1947 SAKA)
Sr. No. Year No. Short title Amendment
1 2 3 4 5
“(2) If any person fails within six months from the
date of its service to comply with a prohibitory notice
issued under sub-section (1), he shall be liable to a penalty
which shall not be less than twenty-five rupees but may
extend to two hundred rupees and with a further penalty of
ten rupees for every day during which the breach
continues.”.
4. For sub-section (2) of section 141, the following
sub-section shall be substituted, namely:-
“(2) Any person acting in contravention of the
terms of sub-section (1) shall be liable to a penalty which
shall not be less than twenty-five rupees but may extend to
two hundred rupees.”.
5. In section 149, for the words and signs “shall be
punishable with a fine which shall not be less than twenty-
five rupees and more than two hundred rupees”, the words
and sign “shall be liable to a penalty which shall not be
less than twenty-five rupees but may extend to two
hundred rupees” shall be substituted.
6. For section 150, the following section shall be
substituted, namely:-
“150. Keeping of animals so as to be injurious to
health.- Whoever keeps any swine or other animal in
disregard of any orders which the committee may give to
prevent them from becoming a nuisance, or so as to be
injurious to the health of the inhabitants or of animals
shall be liable to a penalty of five hundred rupees and for
every such subsequent contravention shall be liable to a
penalty of one thousand rupees.”.
7. In section 158, for the words “shall be punishable
with a fine which shall not be less than one thousand
rupees and more than five thousand rupees and with a
further fine of one hundred rupees for everyday during
which offence is continued”, the words “shall be liable to
a penalty which shall not be less than one thousand rupees
but may extend to five thousand rupees and with a further
penalty of one hundred rupees for everyday during which
offence is continued” shall be substituted.
8. In section 159, for the words and sign “shall, on
conviction by a Magistrate of the first or second class be
punishable with a fine which shall not be less than twenty-
five rupees and more than two hundred rupees”, the words
and sign “shall be liable to a penalty which shall not be
less than twenty-five rupees but may extend to two
hundred rupees” shall be substituted.
9. In section 160, for the words and sign “shall be
punishable with a fine which shall not be less than twenty-
five rupees and more than two hundred rupees”, the words
and sign “shall be liable to a penalty which shall not be
less than twenty-five rupees but may extend to two
hundred rupees” shall be substituted.
10. For sub-section (3) of section 164, the following
sub-section shall be substituted, namely:-
HARYANA GOVT. GAZ. (EXTRA.), JAN. 22, 2026 (MAGH. 2, 1947 SAKA) 53
Sr. No. Year No. Short title Amendment
1 2 3 4 5
“(3) Whoever contravenes the provisions of this
section, shall be liable to a penalty which shall not be less
than twenty-five rupees but may extend to two hundred
rupees .”.
11. In section 189, for the words and sign “shall be
punishable with a fine which shall not be less than twenty-
five rupees and more than two hundred rupees”, the words
and sign “shall be liable to a penalty which shall not be
less than twenty-five rupees but may extend to two
hundred rupees” shall be substituted.
12. In section 190 ,-
(i) in sub-section (1), for the words and sign
“shall be punishable with a fine which shall
not be less than twenty-five rupees and more
than two hundred rupees”, the words and sign
“shall be liable to a penalty which shall not be
less than twenty-five rupees but may extend to
two hundred rupees” shall be substituted;
(ii) sub-section (2) shall be omitted.
13. In sub-section (2) of section 191, for the words and
sign “shall be punishable with a fine which shall not be
less than twenty-five rupees and more than two hundred
rupees”, the words and sign “shall be liable to a penalty
which shall not be less than twenty-five rupees but may
extend to two hundred rupees” shall be substituted.
14. In sub-section (1) of section 194, for the words and
sign “shall be punishable with a fine which shall not be
less than twenty-five rupees and more than two hundred
rupees”, the words and sign “shall be liable to a penalty
which shall not be less than twenty-five rupees but may
extend to two hundred rupees” shall be substituted.
15. In section 195,-
(i) in sub-section (1), for the words and sign
“shall be punishable with a fine which shall
not be less than twenty-five rupees and
more than two hundred rupees”, the words
and sign “shall be liable to a penalty which
shall not be less than twenty-five rupees but
may extend to two hundred rupees” shall be
substituted;
(ii) in sub-section (2), for the words and sign
“shall be liable to a fine which shall not be
less than twenty-five rupees and more than
two hundred rupees”, the words and sign
“shall be liable to a penalty which shall not
be less than twenty-five rupees but may
extend to two hundred rupees” shall be
substituted.
16. In section 196, for the words and sign “shall be
punishable with a fine which shall not be less than twenty-
five rupees and more than two hundred rupees”, the words
and sign “shall be liable to a penalty which shall not be
less than twenty-five rupees but may extend to two
hundred rupees” shall be substituted.
54 HARYANA GOVT. GAZ. (EXTRA.), JAN. 22, 2026 (MAGH. 2, 1947 SAKA)
Sr. No. Year No. Short title Amendment
1 2 3 4 5
17. In section 198, for the words and sign “shall be
punishable with a fine which shall not be less than twenty-
five rupees and more than two hundred rupees”, the words
and sign “shall be liable to a penalty which shall not be
less than twenty-five rupees but may extend to two
hundred rupees” shall be substituted.
18. For section 214, the following section shall be
substituted, namely:-
“214. Penalty for infringement of bye-laws.- In
making any bye-law under any section of this Chapter, the
State Government may direct that a breach or an abetment
of a breach shall be liable to a penalty which shall not be
less than three hundred rupees but may extend to two
thousand rupees, and when the breach is a continuing
breach, with a further penalty of ten rupees for every day
during which the breach continues:
Provided that a breach or an abetment of a breach
under clause (xx) of section 200 shall be liable to a
penalty which shall not be less than two thousand five
hundred rupees but may extend to five thousand rupees:
Provided further that a breach or an abetment of a
breach under clause (xxx) of section 200 shall be liable to
a penalty which shall not be less than one lakh rupees but
may extend to two lakh rupees, and in the case of a
continuing breach, with a further penalty of two thousand
rupees for everyday during which the breach continues.”.
17. 1974 24 The Haryana 1. For section 6, the following section shall be
Anatomy Act, 1974 substituted, namely:-
“6. Penalties.- Whoever with the intention of
defeating the provisions of this Act, disposes of, or abets
the disposal of, an unclaimed body save as permitted by
this Act, or obstructs any authority in-charge of an
approved institution or an authorized officer from handing
over, taking possession of, removing or using, such dead
body for the purpose specified in this Act, shall be liable
to a penalty which may extend to two lakh rupees in case
of first contravention and may extend to five lakh rupees
in case of subsequent contravention.”.
2. After section 6, the following sections shall be
inserted, namely:-
“6A. Adjudication.- (1) The State Government for
the purpose of imposing the penalties, may authorize the
Sub Divisional Magistrate, having jurisdiction, to be the
adjudicating officer, to hold an inquiry and impose
penalty.
(2) The adjudicating officer may summon and
enforce the attendance of any person acquainted with the
facts and circumstances of the case to give evidence or
produce any document, which in the opinion of
adjudicating officer may be useful for, or relevant to the
subject matter of the inquiry, and if, on such inquiry, he is
satisfied that the person concerned has failed to comply
with provisions of section 6, may impose penalty:
HARYANA GOVT. GAZ. (EXTRA.), JAN. 22, 2026 (MAGH. 2, 1947 SAKA) 55
Sr. No. Year No. Short title Amendment
1 2 3 4 5
Provided that no such penalty shall be imposed
without giving the person concerned reasonable
opportunity of being heard.
6B. Appeal.- Whoever aggrieved by the order,
passed by the adjudicating officer under section 6A, may
prefer an appeal within sixty days from the date of receipt
of order to the Deputy Commissioner, having jurisdiction,
to be an appellate authority, specially authorized by the
State Government or administration in this behalf:
Provided that the appellate authority may entertain
an appeal after the expiry of the said specified period, if
he is satisfied that the appellant was prevented by
sufficient cause from filing the appeal within the
stipulated period.
(2) The appellate authority may, after giving the
parties to the appeal an opportunity of being heard, pass
such order, as he may think fit.
(3) An appeal under sub-section (1) shall be
disposed of within sixty days from the date of filling of
such appeal.”.
18. 1974 29 The Haryana Canal In section 58, for the words and signs, “shall, in respect of
and Drainage Act, offences under clauses (a), (b), (c), (g) and (k) above, be
1974 liable on conviction to a fine not exceeding one thousand
rupees or to imprisonment not exceeding six months or
both and in case of continuing offence/ contravention,
with an additional fine which may extend to five hundred
rupees for every subsequent day. In respect of other
offences, the offender shall be liable on conviction to a
fine not exceeding one thousand rupees or imprisonment
not exceeding one month, or both”, the words and signs
“shall, in respect of contraventions under clauses (a), (b),
(c), (g) and (k) above, be liable to a penalty not exceeding
one lakh rupees with an additional penalty which may
extend to five thousand rupees for every subsequent day
in case of continuing contravention. In respect of other
contraventions under clauses (d), (e), (f), (h), (i) and (j),
he shall be liable to a penalty not exceeding twenty-five
thousand rupees” shall be substituted.
19. 1975 8 The Haryana For sub-section (1) of section 10, the following sub-
Development and section shall be substituted, namely:-
Regulation of Urban “10. Penalties.- (1) Any person who contravenes
Areas Act, 1975 any of the provisions of this Act or the rules made
thereunder or any of the conditions of a licence granted
under section 3, shall be liable to pay the penalty as may
be specified:
Provided that any person who contravenes the
provisions of section 7 of the Act shall be punishable with
imprisonment of either description for a term, which may
extend upto one year and shall also be liable to pay fine,
which may extend upto the double of the collector rate,
but not less than half of the collector rate on the land
applicable to which the contravention has been made.”.
56 HARYANA GOVT. GAZ. (EXTRA.), JAN. 22, 2026 (MAGH. 2, 1947 SAKA)
Sr. No. Year No. Short title Amendment
1 2 3 4 5
20. 1975 9 The Haryana In section 16 for the words “shall be punishable with an
Requisitioning and imprisonment which may extend to one year or with fine
Acquisition of or with both”, the words “shall be liable to a penalty
Movable Property which may extend to one thousand rupees” shall be
Act, 1975 substituted.
21. 1983 10 The Haryana For section 24A, the following section shall be
Apartment substituted, namely:-
Ownership Act, 1983 “24A Penalties.- (1) Any owner of
property/building who does not file declaration within the
period specified under section 2, shall be liable to pay a
penalty not less than ten lakh rupees but may extend upto
fifty lakh rupees.
(2) If the owner of the property/building fails to
pay the penalty as imposed under sub-section (1) within a
specified period but not exceeding six months, the
Director or authorized officer may take such measure as
may appear necessary and in default thereof the owner of
property/building shall be punishable with imprisonment
of either description for a term which may extend to one
year and shall also be liable to a fine of not less than fifty
lakh rupees and ten thousand rupees for each day of
continuing offence.”.
22. 1984 22 The Haryana Co- 1. In section 117,-
Operative Societies (i) in sub-section (2), for the words “punishable
Act, 1984 with fine which may extend to five thousand
rupees”, the words “liable to a penalty which
may extend to fifty thousand rupees” shall be
substituted;
(ii) For sub-sections (3), (4), (5), (6), (7) and
(8), the following sub-sections shall be
substituted, namely:-
“(3) A co-operative society or any officer
or a member thereof making a false return
or furnishing false information, or any
person who willfully or without any
reasonable excuse disobeys any summons,
requisition or lawful written order issued
under this Act, or fails to furnish
information required by an authorized
person, shall be liable to a penalty which
may extend to fifty thousand rupees to be
imposed by the Registrar or any officer
authorized by him.
(4) Any employer or officer or agent
acting on behalf of such employer who,
without sufficient cause, fails to deposit
with a co-operative society, the amount
deducted by him under section 45 within
fourteen days from the date of deduction
shall, without prejudice to any action that
may be taken against him under any law for
the time being in force, be liable to a
penalty which may extend to fifty thousand
rupees.
HARYANA GOVT. GAZ. (EXTRA.), JAN. 22, 2026 (MAGH. 2, 1947 SAKA) 57
Sr. No. Year No. Short title Amendment
1 2 3 4 5
(5) Any officer or custodian who willfully
fails to produce or hand over custody of
books, record, cash, security and other
property belonging to a co-operative
society, to a person entitled under sections
50, 51, 95, 97, 98, 99 and 106, shall be
liable to a penalty which may extend to
fifty thousand rupees or deduction of his
one month salary whichever is higher and
in case of a continuing breach beyond six
months with a further penalty which may
extend to one hundred rupees for every day
during which the breach is continued after
imposing penalty for the first such breach.
(6) Any person who fraudulently acquires
or abets in the acquisition of any property
which is subject to a charge under section
52 and 53 shall be liable to a penalty which
may extend to fifty thousand rupees.
(7) Any person who transfers the property
which is subject to a charge of the society
with an intent to evade its sale or
attachment, shall be liable to a penalty
which may extend to fifty thousand rupees.
(8) Any person being a member of the
managing committee who, without
sufficient cause, fails to get the accounts
audited in accordance with the provisions
of section 95 shall be liable to a penalty
which may extend to fifty thousand
rupees;”;
(iii) For sub-section (16), the following sub-
section shall be substituted, namely:-
“(16) Any person who knowingly gives a
false certificate, in whatever form, showing
that a person is or is not a defaulter or an
active member, shall be liable to a penalty
which may extend to fifty thousand
rupees.”;
(iv) For sub-section (18), the following sub-
section shall be substituted, namely:-
“(18) If any person willfully or without
reasonable cause fails to provide
information as required under sub-section
(2) of section 120 within the prescribed
period, he shall be liable to a penalty of one
thousand rupees per day, which may extend
to thirty thousand rupees in total.
Explanation.- The penalties under sub-
sections (2), (3), (4), (5), (6), (7), (8), (16)
and (18) shall be recoverable as arrears of
land revenue and shall be appealable before
the Government under section 117A.”;
58 HARYANA GOVT. GAZ. (EXTRA.), JAN. 22, 2026 (MAGH. 2, 1947 SAKA)
Sr. No. Year No. Short title Amendment
1 2 3 4 5
(v) For sub-section (20), the following sub-
section shall be substituted, namely:-
“(20) The contraventions specified under
sub-sections (2), (3), (4), (5), (6), (7), (8),
(16) and (18) shall be compoundable and
adjudicable by the Registrar or any officer
authorized by him.”.
2. After section 117, the following section shall be
inserted, namely:-
“117A. Appeal.- (1) Any person aggrieved by an
order passed under sub-sections (2), (3), (4), (5), (6), (7),
(8), (16) and (18) of section 117 may, within sixty days
from the date of such order, prefer an appeal to the
Government.
(2) The Government may, after giving the
appellant an opportunity of being heard, confirm, modify
or set aside the order appealed against and its decision
shall be final.”.
23. 1991 14 The Haryana Shri 1. In section 33, for the words “he shall be punishable
Mata Mansa Devi with fine which may extend to one thousand rupees or in
Shrine Act, 1991 default with imprisonment for a term which may extend to
one month”, the words “he shall be liable to a penalty
which may extend to ten thousand rupees for each such
refusal or failure” shall be substituted.
2. In section 34, for the words and signs “shall be
punishable with imprisonment for a term which may
extend to one year, or with fine, or with both”, the words
“shall be liable to a penalty which may extend to fifty
thousand rupees” shall be substituted.
24. 1992 10 The Haryana Shri 1. In sub-section (4) of section 26, for the words “to
Mata Sheetla Devi be detained in civil prison for a term not exceeding one
Shrine Act, 1991 year” the words “to pay a penalty which may extend to
fifty thousand rupees” shall be substituted.
2. In section 33, for the words “he shall be punishable
with fine which may extend to one thousand rupees or in
default with imprisonment for a term which may extend to
one month”, the words “he shall be liable to a penalty
which may extend to ten thousand rupees for each such
refusal or failure” shall be substituted.
3. For clause (c) of section 34, the following clause
shall be substituted, namely:-
“(c) wrongfully removes, destroys or mutilates
property, documents or books of accounts of
the Shrine,
shall be liable to a penalty which may extend to fifty
thousand rupees.”.
25. 1992 15 The Haryana 1. For section 12, the following section shall be
Regulation and substituted, namely:-
Control of Crushers “12. Penalties.- Whoever contravenes any of the
Act, 1991 provisions of section 3 of this Act shall be liable to a
penalty which shall not be less than two lakh rupees but
may extend to four lakh rupees.”.
2. Section 13 shall be omitted.
HARYANA GOVT. GAZ. (EXTRA.), JAN. 22, 2026 (MAGH. 2, 1947 SAKA) 59
Sr. No. Year No. Short title Amendment
1 2 3 4 5
26. 1993 16 The Haryana Cotton 1. For section 5, the following section shall be
Ginning and Pressing substituted, namely:-
Factories Act, 1992 “5. Prohibition of admixture of cotton in specified
areas and penalties therefor.- (1) The State Government
may, by notification in the Official Gazette, prohibit, in
any area specified in the notification, any admixture of
cotton which is ginned or pressed in a cotton ginning or
cotton pressing factory.
(2) In any area specified in the notification
under sub-section (1), if-
(a) any owner of a cotton ginning or cotton
pressing factory gins or presses or
allows to be ginned or pressed any
cotton which he knows or has reason to
believe to contain an admixture of
cotton; or
(b) any person makes any admixture of
cotton, or abets or knowingly allows or
connives at such admixture of cotton
which is ginned and which is being, or
is intended to be pressed in a cotton
pressing factory,
he shall be liable to a penalty which shall not be less than
twenty-five thousand rupees but may extend to fifty
thousand rupees for the first violation, one lakh rupees for
the subsequent violation and in case the violation still
continues then the licence shall be suspended for a
minimum period of two years.”.
2. For section 6, the following section shall be
substituted, namely:-
“6. Penalty for watering, etc.- (1) Any owner of a
cotton ginning or cotton pressing factory who knowingly
or having reason to believe that any cotton is watered or
contains seed in excess of the prescribed proportion or
contains any foreign substance or cotton waste, gins or
presses or allows such cotton to be ginned or pressed in
such factory shall be liable to a penalty which shall not be
less than twenty-five thousand rupees but may extend to
fifty thousand rupees for the first violation, one lakh
rupees for the subsequent violation and in case the
violation still continues then the licence shall be
suspended for a minimum period of two years.
(2) Any person who knowingly waters or wets any
cotton or mixes seed or foreign substance or cotton waste
with any cotton or abets or knowingly allows or connives
at such watering, wetting or mixing of cotton, which is
ginned and which is being or is intended to be pressed in a
cotton pressing factory shall be liable to a penalty which
shall not be less than twenty-five thousand rupees but may
extend to fifty thousand rupees for the first violation, one
lakh rupees for the subsequent violation and in case the
violation still continues then the licence shall be
suspended for a minimum period of two years.”.
60 HARYANA GOVT. GAZ. (EXTRA.), JAN. 22, 2026 (MAGH. 2, 1947 SAKA)
Sr. No. Year No. Short title Amendment
1 2 3 4 5
27. 1994 16 The Haryana For section 380, the following section shall be substituted,
Municipal namely:-
Corporation Act, “380. Punishment or penalties for certain offences.-
1994 (1) Whoever –
(a) contravenes any provisions of this
Act mentioned in the first column of
the Table (i) or Table (ii) in the
Third Schedule as annexed with this
Act as Annexure A; or
(b) fails to comply with any order
lawfully given to him or any
requisition lawfully made upon him
under any of the said sections, sub-
sections, clauses, provisos or other
provisions shall be–
(i) punishable with fine which
may extend to the amount,
specified in the third column
of the Table (i) of the Third
Schedule; and in the case of a
continuing contravention or
failure, with an additional fine
which may extend to the
amount specified in the fourth
column of Table (i) for
everyday during which such
contravention or failure
continues after conviction for
the first such contravention or
failure; or
(ii) liable to pay a penalty which
may extend to the amount,
specified in the third column
of the Table (ii) of the Third
Schedule; and in the case of a
continuing contravention or
failure; with an additional
penalty which may extend to
the amount specified in the
fourth column of Table (ii) for
everyday during which such
contravention or failure
continues.”.
(2) For the existing Third Schedule, the Third
Schedule as annexed as Annexure A with this Act shall
be substituted.”.
28. 1996 9 The Haryana In sub-section (1) of section 10, for the words and signs
Mechanical Vehicles “shall on conviction be liable to a fine of one thousand
(Levy of Tolls) Act, rupees, which may extend to five thousand rupees and in
1996 default, sentenced to simple imprisonment for a term not
exceeding six months”, the words “shall be liable to a
penalty of not less than ten thousand rupees but may
extend to one lakh rupees” shall be substituted.
HARYANA GOVT. GAZ. (EXTRA.), JAN. 22, 2026 (MAGH. 2, 1947 SAKA) 61
Sr. No. Year No. Short title Amendment
1 2 3 4 5
29. 2001 6 The Haryana Murrah For section 11, the following section shall be substituted,
Buffalo and other namely:-
Milch Animal “11. Penalties.- Any person who commits or abets the
Breed (Preservation commission of an act in violation of the provisions
and Development of contained in section 10 shall be liable to a penalty of
Animal Husbandry twenty thousand rupees to be imposed by the Deputy
and Diary Director, Animal Husbandry and Dairying Department of
Development Sector) the concerned district or by any other competent authority
Act, 2001 as may be specified. In the event of a second or
subsequent contravention, the person shall be liable to a
penalty of one lakh rupees.
(2) Any person aggrieved by the imposition of a
penalty may prefer an appeal within fifteen days from the
date of imposition of such penalty. The Director General,
Animal Husbandry and Dairying Department shall be the
appellate authority for this purpose. The appellate
authority may delegate its power to hear the appeal to any
officer of the department not below the rank of Joint
Director. The appeal shall be decided by the appellate
authority within thirty days, after affording the appellant
an opportunity of being heard.”.
30. 2003 6 The Haryana Value 1. For sub-section (2) of section 53, the following
Added Tax Act, sub-section shall be substituted, namely:-
2003 “(2) Save as provided in sub-section (3), if any
officer of the State Government discloses any of the
particulars referred to in sub-section (1), he shall be liable
to a penalty which may extend to one lakh rupees to be
imposed by the Commissioner.
Explanation.- For the purposes of this sub-section,
the Commissioner may summon and enforce the
attendance of any person acquainted with the facts and
circumstances of the case to give evidence or to produce
any documents, which in the opinion of the
Commissioner, may be useful for or relevant to the subject
matter and if he is satisfied that the officer concerned has
contravened the provisions of sub-section (1), he may
impose such penalty, as he thinks fit:
Provided that no such penalty shall be imposed
without giving the officer concerned a reasonable
opportunity of being heard.”.
2. After section 53, the following section shall be
inserted, namely:-
“53A. Appeal.- (1) Any person aggrieved by an
order passed under sub-section (2) of section 53, may
prefer an appeal within a period of sixty days from the date
of receipt of such order to the appellate authority, as may
be specified:
Provided that the appellate authority may entertain
an appeal after the expiry of the said period of sixty days,
if he is satisfied that the appellant was prevented by
sufficient cause from filing the appeal within the
stipulated period.
62 HARYANA GOVT. GAZ. (EXTRA.), JAN. 22, 2026 (MAGH. 2, 1947 SAKA)
Sr. No. Year No. Short title Amendment
1 2 3 4 5
(2) The appellate authority may, after giving the
parties to the appeal an opportunity of being heard, pass
such order, as he may think fit.
(3) An appeal under sub-section (1) , shall be
disposed of within a period of one hundred and eighty
(180) days from the date of filing of appeal.”.
31. 2008 7 The Haryana For section 13, the following section shall be substituted,
Evacuee Properties namely:-
(Management and “13. Penalties.- Any person who furnishes false,
Disposal) Act, 2008 wrong or incorrect information, document or evidence in
any manner whatsoever to any officer appointed under
this Act, shall be liable to a penalty which shall not be less
than twenty thousand rupees but may extend to fifty
thousand rupees:
Provided that the imposition of a penalty under this
section shall not be a bar for prosecution under the
provisions of the Bharatiya Nyaya Sanhita, 2023 (Central
Act 45 of 2023) or any other law for time being in force.”.
32. 2008 31 The Haryana For section 16, the following section shall be substituted,
Underground namely:-
Pipelines “16. Penalties.- (1) Whoever willfully obstructs
(Acquisition of Right any person in doing any of the acts authorized under
of User in Land) Act, sections 5, 6 or 7 or willfully fills up, destroys, damages
2008 or displaces any trench or mark made under section 5 or
willfully does anything prohibited under the proviso to
sub-section (1) of section 8, shall be liable for a penalty of
fifty thousand rupees and in case of subsequent violation,
the penalty imposed shall be double of the penalty
imposed for the first violation.
(2) Whoever willfully removes, displaces, damages
or destroys any underground pipeline laid, may be liable
to pay the assessed amount of damage alongwith a penalty
of ten thousand rupees and in case of subsequent
violation, the penalty imposed shall be double of the
penalty imposed for the first violation.”.
33. 2008 38 The Haryana For section 17, the following section shall be substituted,
Regulation of namely:-
Property Dealers and “17. Penalties.- (1) Any person who contravenes
Consultants Act, any provisions of this Act or any rules made thereunder,
2008 shall be liable to a penalty of fifty thousand rupees and in
case of subsequent violation, the penalty imposed shall be
double of the penalty imposed for the first violation.
(2) Any person or company or society found
indulging in the property dealing or property consulting
business, without having a valid license under this Act,
shall be liable to a penalty of fifty thousand rupees in case
of an individual or one lakh rupees in case of a society,
company or any organization and shall also be liable to
pay all the benefits so received and the damages suffered
by the affected party while dealing with the property for
which commission has been paid by any party to the deal.
In case of subsequent violation, the penalty imposed shall
be double of the penalty imposed for the first violation.”.
HARYANA GOVT. GAZ. (EXTRA.), JAN. 22, 2026 (MAGH. 2, 1947 SAKA) 63
Sr. No. Year No. Short title Amendment
1 2 3 4 5
34. 2008 26 Pandit Bhagwat 1. For sub-section (2) of section 5, the following sub-
Dayal Sharma section shall be substituted, namely:-
University of Health “(2) The contravention of the provisions of sub-
Sciences Rohtak Act, section (1), shall be liable to a penalty which may extend
2008 to two lakh rupees and in case of subsequent
contravention may extend to five lakh rupees as per the
regulations laid down in this regard keeping in view the
orders and guidelines issued by the competent authorities
and academic bodies such as the Government and the
University Grants Commission.”.
2. After section 5, the following sections shall be
inserted, namely:-
“5A. Adjudication.- (1) The Government may for
the purpose of determining the penalties may authorize
Deputy Commissioner, having jurisdiction, to be the
adjudicating officer to hold an inquiry and impose
penalty, in the manner as may be specified.
(2) The Adjudicating Officer may summon and
enforce the attendance of any person acquainted with the
facts and circumstances to give evidence or produce any
document, which in the opinion of adjudicating officer
may be useful for, or relevant to the subject matter of the
inquiry, and if, on such inquiry, he is satisfied that the
person concerned has failed to comply with provisions of
section 6, he may impose penalty:
Provided that no such penalty shall be imposed
without giving the person concerned a reasonable
opportunity of being heard.
5B. Appeal.- Whoever aggrieved by the order
passed by the Adjudicating Officer under section 5A may
prefer an appeal to the Divisional Commissioner, having
jurisdiction to be an appellate authority specially
authorized by the Government or administration in this
behalf, within sixty days from the date of receipt of order,
in such form and manner as may be specified.
(2) An appeal may be admitted after the expiry of the
period of sixty days if the appellant satisfies the appellate
authority that he had sufficient cause for not preferring the
appeal within that period.
(3) The appellate authority may, after giving the
parties to the appeal an opportunity of being heard, pass
such order, as he may think fit.
(4) An appeal under sub-section (1), shall be
disposed of within the period of sixty days from the date
of filing of appeal.”.
35. 2009 6 The Haryana For section 7, the following section shall be substituted,
Preservation of Sub- namely:-
Soil Water Act, 2009 “Penalties.-(1) Any farmer, who contravenes any
of the provisions of this Act, shall be liable to a penalty of
twenty-five thousand rupees for every month or part
thereof per hectare of land. In case the farmer fails to pay
the penalty, he shall be debarred from getting the benefits
of departmental schemes for a period of two years.
64 HARYANA GOVT. GAZ. (EXTRA.), JAN. 22, 2026 (MAGH. 2, 1947 SAKA)
Sr. No. Year No. Short title Amendment
1 2 3 4 5
(2) The penalty referred to in sub-section (1), shall
be in addition to the recovery of the expenses, actually
incurred for destroying the nursery of paddy sown or
transplanted before the notified date.
(3) Before passing any order for imposing any
penalty under sub-section (1), the authorized officer shall
make such enquiry, as he may deem necessary and shall
give an opportunity of being heard to the concerned
farmer.”.
36. 2010 12 The Haryana 1. For clause (b) of section 33, the following clause
Shri Kapal Mochan, shall be substituted, namely:-
Shri Badri Narain, “(b) refuses, or willfully fails to furnish any reports,
Shri Mantra Devi statements, accounts or other information called for under
and Shri Kedar Nath this Act,
Shrine Act, 2009
shall be liable to a penalty which may extend to ten
thousand rupees for each such refusal or failure.”.
2. For clause (c) of section 34, the following clause
shall be substituted, namely:-
“(c) wrongfully removes, destroys or mutilates
property, documents or books of accounts
of the Shrine,
shall be liable to a penalty which may extend to fifty
thousand rupees.”.
37. 2014 6 The Haryana Clinical 1. In section 36,-
Establishments (i) in sub-section (2), for the word “fine”,
(Registration and the word “penalty” shall be substituted;
Regulation) Act,
(ii) for sub-section (3), the following sub-
2014
section shall be substituted, namely:-
“(3) Any person who continues to
run a clinical establishment after the
order of closure under sub-section (2),
shall be liable to a penalty which may
extend to five lakh rupees.”.
2. In section 37,-
(i) in sub-section (2), for the words “shall be
punished with fine”, the words “shall be
liable to a penalty” shall be substituted;
(ii) in sub-section (3), for the words “shall be
punished with fine”, the words “shall be
liable to a penalty” shall be substituted;
(iii) for sub-section (4), the following sub-
section shall be substituted, namely:-
“(4) Whoever being required by or
under this Act to supply any information,
willfully withholds such information or
gives information which he knows to be
false or which he does not believe to be
true, shall be liable to a penalty which may
extend to two lakh rupees.”;
HARYANA GOVT. GAZ. (EXTRA.), JAN. 22, 2026 (MAGH. 2, 1947 SAKA) 65
Sr. No. Year No. Short title Amendment
1 2 3 4 5
(iv) in sub-section (5), for the words “any
fine”, the words “a penalty” shall be
substituted;
(v) in sub-section (7), for the words
“punished with fine”, the words “liable to
a penalty” shall be substituted.
38. 2016 27 Pandit Deen Dayal 1. For sub-section (2) of section 5, the following sub-
Upadhaya of section shall be substituted, namely:-
University of Health “(2) The contravention of the provisions of sub-
Sciences, Karnal section (1) shall be liable to a penalty which may extend
Act, 2016 to two lakh rupees and in case of subsequent
contravention may extend to five lakh rupees as per the
regulations laid down in this regard keeping in view the
orders and guidelines issued by the competent authorities
and academic bodies such as the Government and the
University Grants Commission.”.
2. After section 5, the following sections shall be
inserted, namely:-
“5A. Adjudication.- (1) The Government may for
the purpose of determining the penalties may authorize
Deputy Commissioner, having jurisdiction, to be the
adjudicating officer to hold an inquiry and impose
penalty, in the manner as may be specified.
(2) The adjudicating officer may summon and
enforce the attendance of any person acquainted with the
facts and circumstances to give evidence or produce any
document, which in the opinion of adjudicating officer
may be useful for, or relevant to the subject matter of the
inquiry, and if, on such inquiry, he is satisfied that the
person concerned has failed to comply with provisions of
section 6, he may impose penalty:
Provided that no such penalty shall be imposed
without giving the person concerned a reasonable
opportunity of being heard.
5B. Appeal.- Whoever aggrieved by the order
passed by the Adjudicating Officer under section 5A may
prefer an appeal to the Divisional Commissioner, having
jurisdiction to be an appellate authority specially
authorized by the Government or administration in this
behalf, within sixty days from the date of receipt of order,
in such form and manner as may be specified.
(2) An appeal may be admitted after the expiry of
the period of sixty days if the appellant satisfies the
appellate authority that he had sufficient cause for not
preferring the appeal within that period.
(3) The appellate authority may, after giving the
parties to the appeal an opportunity of being heard, pass
such order, as he may think fit.
(4) An appeal under sub-section (1) shall be
disposed of within the period of sixty days from the date
of filing of appeal.”.
66 HARYANA GOVT. GAZ. (EXTRA.), JAN. 22, 2026 (MAGH. 2, 1947 SAKA)
Sr. No. Year No. Short title Amendment
1 2 3 4 5
39. 2017 3 The Haryana Nurses 1. For sub-section (2) of section 32, the following
and Nurse-Midwives sub-section shall be substituted, namely:-
Act, 2017 “(2) Whosoever contravenes the provisions of sub-
section (1), shall be liable to a penalty which may extend
to two lakh rupees.”.
2. After section 32, the following sections shall be
inserted, namely:-
“32A. Adjudication.- (1) The Government for the
purpose of imposing the penalties, may authorize the Sub
Divisional Magistrate, having jurisdiction, to be the
adjudicating officer to hold an inquiry and impose
penalty.
(2) The adjudicating officer may summon and
enforce the attendance of any person acquainted with the
facts and circumstances of the case to give evidence or
produce any document, which in the opinion of
adjudicating officer may be useful for, or relevant to the
subject matter of the inquiry, and if, on such inquiry, he is
satisfied that the person concerned has failed to comply
with the provisions of section 32, may impose penalty:
Provided that no such penalty shall be imposed
without giving the person concerned reasonable
opportunity of being heard.
32B. Appeal.- Whoever aggrieved by the order,
passed by the adjudicating officer under section 32A, may
prefer an appeal to the Deputy Commissioner, having
jurisdiction, to be an appellate authority, specially
authorized by the Government or administration in this
behalf, within sixty days from the date of receipt of order:
Provided that the appellate authority may entertain
an appeal after the expiry of the said specified period, if
he is satisfied that the appellant was prevented by
sufficient cause from filing the appeal within the
stipulated period.
(2) The appellate authority may, after giving the
parties to the appeal an opportunity of being heard, pass
such order, as he may think fit.
(3) An appeal under sub-section (1) shall be
disposed of within sixty days from the date of filing of
such appeal.”.
40. 2019 17 The Haryana Animal 1. For section 26, the following section shall be
(Registration, substituted, namely:-
Certification and “26. Penalties for contravention of section 16 and
Breeding) Act, 2019 17.- (1) Any person who acts or abets the commission of
an act in contravention of the provisions contained in
section 16 and section 17 shall be liable to a penalty of
twenty thousand rupees to be imposed by the Deputy
Director, Animal Husbandry and Dairying Department of
the concerned district or by any other competent authority
as may be specified. In the event of a second or
subsequent contravention, he shall be liable to a penalty of
one lakh rupees.
HARYANA GOVT. GAZ. (EXTRA.), JAN. 22, 2026 (MAGH. 2, 1947 SAKA) 67
Sr. No. Year No. Short title Amendment
1 2 3 4 5
(2) Any person aggrieved by the imposition of a
penalty may prefer an appeal within fifteen days from the
date of imposition of such penalty. The Director General,
Animal Husbandry and Dairying Department shall be the
appellate authority for this purpose. The appellate
authority may delegate its power to hear the appeal to any
officer of the department not below the rank of Joint
Director. The appeal shall be decided by the appellate
authority within thirty days, after affording the appellant
an opportunity of being heard.”.
2. For section 27, the following section shall be
substituted, namely:-
“27. Penalties.- (1) Any person who acts or abets
the commission of an act in violation of the provisions
contained in sections other than section 16 and section 17,
shall be liable to a penalty of one lakh rupees to be
imposed by the Deputy Director, Animal Husbandry and
Dairying Department of the concerned district or by any
other competent authority as may be specified. In the
event of a second or subsequent contravention, the person
shall be liable to a penalty of two lakh rupees.
(2) Any person aggrieved by the imposition of a
penalty may prefer an appeal within fifteen days from the
date of imposition of such penalty. The Director General,
Animal Husbandry and Dairying Department shall be the
appellate authority for this purpose. The appellate
authority may delegate its power to hear the appeal to any
officer of the department not below the rank of Joint
Director. The appeal shall be decided by the appellate
authority within thirty days, after affording the appellant
an opportunity of being heard.”.
41. 2022 14 The Haryana Fire 1. For section 25, the following section shall be
and Emergency substituted, namely:-
Services Act, 2022 “25. Penalties for violation of section 12.-
Whoever contravenes the provisions of sub-section (1) of
section 12, without prejudice to any other action taken
against him under this Act shall be liable to a penalty
which may extend to fifty thousand rupees to be imposed
by the Director or any officer authorized by him in this
behalf. In case of subsequent violation, the penalty
imposed shall be double of the penalty imposed for first
violation.”.
2. For section 29, the following section shall be
substituted, namely:-
“29. False report.-Any person who knowingly
gives or causes to be given a false report of the outbreak
of a fire to any person authorized to receive such report by
means of a statement, message or otherwise shall be liable
to a penalty which may extend to ten thousand rupees to
be imposed by the Director or any officer authorized by
him in this behalf. In case of subsequent violation, the
penalty imposed shall be double of the penalty imposed
for first violation.”.
68 HARYANA GOVT. GAZ. (EXTRA.), JAN. 22, 2026 (MAGH. 2, 1947 SAKA)
Sr. No. Year No. Short title Amendment
1 2 3 4 5
42. 2024 12 The Haryana For section 10, the following sections shall be substituted,
Registration and namely:-
Regulation of Private “10. Penalty.- In case of violation of any of the
Coaching Institutes provisions of this Act or the rules made or guidelines
Act, 2024 issued under this Act, a private coaching institute shall be
liable for each such violation with a penalty of twenty-five
thousand rupees for the first violation, one lakh rupees for
the subsequent violation and in case the violation still
continues then the registration of private coaching
institute shall be cancelled.
10A. Competent authority and appellate authority.-
The Authority constituted under section 3 of this Act shall
be the competent authority to impose penalty under
section 10 after giving a reasonable opportunity of being
heard to an institute and an appeal against such order of
the competent authority may be filed within thirty days of
such order to the appellate authority constituted under
section 8 of this Act.”.
HARYANA GOVT. GAZ. (EXTRA.), JAN. 22, 2026 (MAGH. 2, 1947 SAKA) 69
Annexure A
THIRD SCHEDULE
(see section 380)
Table (i)
Sr. No. Section, Sub-section, Subject Fine or Daily fine
clause or proviso of imprisonment which may
HMC Act, 1994 which may be imposed
be imposed
1 2 3 4
Rs. Rs.
1. Section 188 Refusal of admittance, etc. 500 --
2. Section 191, Laying of water pipes, etc. in a position 500 50
sub-section (1) where the same may be injured or
water therein polluted
3. Section 195 Injury to, or interference with flow of 500 50
contents of Municipal drain or drains
communicating with Municipal drain
4. Section 197 Non-compliance with requisition for 500 50
drainage of undrained premises
5. Section 198 Erection of new premises without 1,000 100
drains
6. Section 199 Non-compliance with requisition of 500 50
maintenance of drainage works for any
group or block of premises
7. Section 200 Non-compliance with direction to close 500 50
or limit the use of private drains in
certain cases
8. Section 201 Non-compliance with Commissioner's 500 --
order regarding the use of a drain by a
person other than the owner thereof
9. Section 202 Non-compliance with requisition for 500 --
keeping sewage and rain water drains
distinct
10. Section 203 Non-compliance with requisition for 500 --
the pavement of courtyard, etc.
11. Section 208, Non-compliance with requisition to 500 50
sub-section (4) close, remove or divert a pipe or drain
12. Section 215 Prohibition of willful or neglectful acts 500 --
relating to water or sewage works
13. Section 223, Construction of building within the 2,000 200
sub-section (3) regular line of street without
permission
14. Section 228 Failure to comply with requisition to 500 50
set forward building to regular line of
street
15. Section 235, Prohibition of projections upon street, Imprisonment for 100
sub-section (1) etc. one month or
Rs. 1,000 or both
70 HARYANA GOVT. GAZ. (EXTRA.), JAN. 22, 2026 (MAGH. 2, 1947 SAKA)
Sr. No. Section, Sub-section, Subject Fine or Daily fine
clause or proviso of imprisonment which may
HMC Act, 1994 which may be imposed
be imposed
1 2 3 4
Rs. Rs.
16. Section 235, Failure to comply with requisition to 500 50
sub-section (2) remove projections from street
17. Section 236, Failure to comply with requisition to 500 50
sub-section (2) remove a verandah, balcony, etc. put
out in accordance with section 236 (l)
18. Section 237 Failure to comply with requisition to 1,000 50
have ground floor doors, etc. so altered
as not to open outwards
19. Section 246, Failure to comply with requisition to 500 50
sub-section (1) repair, project or enclose a dangerous
place
20. Section 257 Failure to comply with requisition to 500 50
round of buildings at corners of streets
21. Section 258, Erection of buildings or execution of 1,000 --
sub-section (2) work, within regular line of street or in
contravention of any scheme for plan
22. Section 261 Failure to demolish buildings erected 2,000 200
without sanction or erection of
buildings in contravention of order
23. Section 262 Erection of buildings in contravention 2,000 200
of conditions of sanction, etc.
24. Section 263 Failure to carry out alterations 2,000 --
25. Section 264, Non-compliance with revision as to 500 50
sub-sections (1) and (2) completion certificates, occupation or
use, etc.
26. Section 265, Non-compliance with restrictions on 1,000 100
sub-section (1) user of buildings
27. Section 265, Failure to comply with requisition and 2,000 200
sub-sections (2) and (3) to remove structures which are in ruins
or likely to fall
28. Section 266, Failure to comply with requisition to 1,000 100
sub-section (1) vacate buildings in dangerous
conditions, etc.
29. Section 281, Failure to comply with requisition for 1,000 100
sub-section (2) removal of congested buildings
30. Section 282 Failure to comply with requisition to 1,000 --
improve buildings unfit for human
habitation
31. Section 284, Failure to comply with order of 2,000 200
sub-sections (1), (2), (3) demolition of buildings unfit for human
and (4) habitation
32. Section 289 Failure to comply with requisition to 500 --
cleanse and disinfect buildings or
articles
HARYANA GOVT. GAZ. (EXTRA.), JAN. 22, 2026 (MAGH. 2, 1947 SAKA) 71
Sr. No. Section, Sub-section, Subject Fine or Daily fine
clause or proviso of imprisonment which may
HMC Act, 1994 which may be imposed
be imposed
1 2 3 4
Rs. Rs.
33. Section 302 Removal of infectious corpses in 500 --
contravention of the provisions of the
section
34. Section 305 Use of new burning or burial ground 500 --
without permission
35. Section 306, Failure to comply with requisition to 500 --
sub-section (1) close a burning or burial grounds
36. Section 306, sub-section Burning or burial of corpses in a burial 500 --
(2) ground after it has been closed
37. Section 307 Removal of corpses by other than 500 --
prescribed routes
38. Section 309, Commission of nuisances 500 --
sub-sections (1),
(2) and (3)
39. Section 310 Failure to comply with requisition for 500 50
removal or abatement of nuisance
40. Section 311, Dogs not to be at large in a street 500 --
sub-section (4) without being secured by a chain lead
41. Section 311, Ferocious dogs at large without being 500 --
sub-section (5) muzzled, etc.
42. Section 312 Stacking inflammable material in 5,000 --
contravention of prohibition
43. Section 314 Discharging fire-works, fire arms, etc. 500 --
likely to cause danger
44. Section 315 Failure to comply with requisition to 500 --
render buildings, wells etc., safe
45. Section 316 Failure to comply with requisition to 500 --
enclose land use for improper purposes
46. Section 322, Use of places as private market without 500 50
sub-section (1) a license and use of places other than a
municipal slaughter house as slaughter
houses.
47. Section 322, Non-compliance with conditions 500 --
sub-section (2) imposed by Commissioner
Proviso (a)
48. Section 329 Carrying on butcher, 500 50
fish -monger's or poulterer's trade
without licence, etc.
49. Section 331 Certain things not to be kept and 500 100
certain trades and operations not to be
carried on without a licence
50. Section 333 Use of premises in contravention of 500 --
sub-section (5) declaration
51. Section 353 Preventing the Commissioner or any 500 100
person authorised in this behalf from
exercising his powers of entry, etc.
72 HARYANA GOVT. GAZ. (EXTRA.), JAN. 22, 2026 (MAGH. 2, 1947 SAKA)
Sr. No. Section, Sub-section, Subject Fine or Daily fine
clause or proviso of imprisonment which may
HMC Act, 1994 which may be imposed
be imposed
1 2 3 4
Rs. Rs.
52. Section 354 Preventing the Commissioner or any 500 --
person authorised in this behalf from
exercising his powers of entry upon
any adjoining land
53. Section 359 Obstruction or molestation in execution 500 --
of work
54. Section 366 Failure to comply with requisition to 500 --
sub-section (4) state the name and address of owners
of premises
55. Section 375, Failure of occupier of land or building 500 50
sub-section (3) to afford owner facilities for complying
with provisions of the order, etc. after
eight days from issue of order by
District Judge.
56. Section 405 Obstruction of Mayor or any 500 --
Corporation authority, etc.
57. Section 406 Removal of any mark set up for 500 --
indicating level, etc.
58. Section 407 Removal etc. of notice exhibit by or 500 --
under order of the Corporation
Commissioner, etc.
59. Section 408 Unlawful removal of earth, sand or 500 --
other material or deposit of any matter
or making of any encroachment from
any land vested in the Corporation
Table (ii)
Sr. Section, sub- Subject Penalty Daily penalty
No. section, clause which may which may
or provision of
be imposed be imposed
HMC Act, 1994
1 2 3 4
Rs. Rs.
1. Section 101, Failure to give notice of transfer or devolution 500 50
sub-sections (1) of land or building
and (2)
2. Section 101, Failure to produce instrument of transfer 500 50
sub-section (3)
3. Section 102 Failure to give notice of erection of new 500 --
building etc.
4. Section 103 Failure to give notice of demolition or 500 50
removal of building
5. Section 104 Failure to comply with requisition to furnish 500 --
information, etc.
HARYANA GOVT. GAZ. (EXTRA.), JAN. 22, 2026 (MAGH. 2, 1947 SAKA) 73
Sr. Section, sub- Subject Penalty Daily penalty
No. section, clause which may which may
or provision of
be imposed be imposed
HMC Act, 1994
1 2 3 4
Rs. Rs.
6. Section 108, Wilful delay or obstruction of valuers 500 --
sub-section (2)
7. Section 122 Prohibition of advertisement without 500 50
permission
8. Section 142, Non-compliance with the requisition of 500 --
sub-section (2) attendance before the Commissioner
9. Section 145 Failure to disclose liability 500 --
10. Section 180 Failure to give notice 500 --
11. Section 182 Prohibition to occupy new premises without 500 50
arrangement for water supply
12. Section 191, Construction of latrines, etc., in a position 500 50
sub-section (2) where pipes may be injured or water therein
polluted
13. Section 196, Private drain not to be connected with 500 50
sub-section (2) Municipal drain without notice
14. Section 205 Connection with Municipal Water works of 500 50
drains without written permission
15. Section 214, Execution of work by a person other than a 500 --
sub-section (1) licenced plumber
16. Section 214, Failure to furnish when required, name of 500 --
sub-section (2) licensed plumber employed
17. Section 214, Licensed plumbers not to demand more than 500 --
sub-section (6) the charges prescribed
18. Section 214, Licensed plumbers not to contravene bye-law 500 --
sub-section (8) or executive work carelessly, or negligently
etc.
19. Section 231, Utilising, Setting or otherwise dealing with 500 50
sub-section (5) any land or laying out a private street
otherwise than in conformity with orders of
the Corporation
20. Section 232, Failure to comply with requisition to show 500 50
sub-sections (1), cause for alteration of street or for appearance
clauses (a) before the Commissioner
and (b)
21. Section 233, Failure to comply with requisition on owner of 500 50
sub-section (1) private street or owner of adjoining land or
building to level, etc. such street
22. Section 238, Erection, etc. of structure or fixtures which 1,000 100
sub-section (1) cause obstruction in street.
23. Section 238, Deposit, etc. of things in streets 500 --
sub-section (2)
74 HARYANA GOVT. GAZ. (EXTRA.), JAN. 22, 2026 (MAGH. 2, 1947 SAKA)
Sr. Section, sub- Subject Penalty Daily penalty
No. section, clause which may which may
or provision of
be imposed be imposed
HMC Act, 1994
1 2 3 4
Rs. Rs.
24. Section 241, Tethering of animals and milking of cattle in 500 --
sub-sections (1) public streets
and (2)
25. Section 242, Unlawful removal of bar or sorting timber 500 --
sub-section (4) etc., or removal or extinction of light
26. Section 243, Streets not to be opened or broken up and 500 50
sub-section (1) building material not to be deposited thereon
without permission
27. Section 245, Name of street and number of house not be 500 --
sub-section destroyed or defaced etc.
(2)
28. Section 248, Removal etc. of lamps 500 --
sub-section (1)
29. Section 248, Wilfully and negligently extinguishing light in 500 --
sub-section (2) public street etc.
30. Section 250 Erection of a building without the sanction of 5,000 500
the Commissioner
31. Section 251, Failure to give notice of intention to erect a 500 --
sub-section (1) building
32. Section 252 Failure to give notice of intention to make 500 50
additions, etc., to buildings
33. Section 255, Commencement of work without notice, etc. 2,000 200
sub-section (4)
34. Section 258, Erection of buildings on new streets without 1,000 50
sub-section (1) levelling
35. Section 260 Use of inflammable material without 1,000 --
permission
36. Section 271 Failure to provide for collection, removal and 500 50
deposit of refuse and provision of receptacles
37. Section 272 Failure to comply with requisition for removal 500 --
of rubbish etc. from premises used as market
etc.
38. Section 273, Keeping rubbish and filth for more than 500 50
sub-section (1) twenty four hours etc.
39. Section 273, Allowing filth to flow in streets. 500 50
sub-section (2)
40. Section 273, Depositing rubbish or filth etc. in street etc. 500 --
sub-section (3)
41. Section 275, Latrines and urinals not to be constructed 500 --
sub-section (1) without permission or in contravention of
terms prescribed
HARYANA GOVT. GAZ. (EXTRA.), JAN. 22, 2026 (MAGH. 2, 1947 SAKA) 75
Sr. Section, sub- Subject Penalty Daily penalty
No. section, clause which may which may
or provision of
be imposed be imposed
HMC Act, 1994
1 2 3 4
Rs. Rs.
42. Section 277, Failure to provide buildings newly erected or 1,000 100
sub-section (1) re-erected with latrine, urinal and other
accommodation
43. Section 277, Failure to provide residential buildings 500 --
sub-section (3) composed of separate tenements with latrine,
bathing or washing place for servants on the
ground floor
44. Section 278 Failure to provide latrines for premises used 500 50
by large number of people and to keep them
clean and in proper order
45. Section 279 Failure to comply with requisition to enforce 500 50
provision of latrines or urinal etc.
46. Section 280, Failure to comply with requisition to enforce 500 50
Clauses (a), (b), provision of latrine or urinal accommodation
(c) and (d) etc.
47. Section 285 Failure to comply with requisition of the 500 50
Commissioner to remove in sanitary huts and
sheds etc.
48. Section 286, Prohibition against washing by washerman 500 --
sub-section (1)
49. Section 287 Failure to give information of dangerous 500 --
disease.
50. Section 290 Failure to comply with requisition to destroy 500 --
infectious huts or sheds
51. Section 291 Washing of clothing, bedding etc. at any place 500 --
not notified by the Commissioner
52. Section 293, Sending infected clothes to washer man or 500 --
sub-section (1) laundry.
53. Section 293, Failure to furnish address of washer man or 500 --
sub-section (2) laundry to which clothes have been sent.
54. Section 294, Use of public conveyances by persons 500 --
sub-sections (1), suffering from a dangerous disease etc.
(2) and (3)
55. Section 296 Failure to disinfect buildings before letting the 500 --
same
56. Section 297 Disposal of infected articles without 500 --
disinfections
57. Section 298 Making or selling of food etc. or washing of 500 --
clothing by infected persons
58. Section 299 Sale of food or drink in contravention of 500 --
restriction or prohibition of the Commissioner
76 HARYANA GOVT. GAZ. (EXTRA.), JAN. 22, 2026 (MAGH. 2, 1947 SAKA)
Sr. Section, sub- Subject Penalty Daily penalty
No. section, clause which may which may
or provision of
be imposed be imposed
HMC Act, 1994
1 2 3 4
Rs. Rs.
59. Section 300 Removal or use of water from wells and tanks 500 --
in contravention of prohibition of
Commissioner
60. Section 301 Exposure of persons to risk of infection by the 500 --
presence or conduct of a person suffering from
a dangerous disease, etc.
61. Section 303, Absence of sweepers, etc., from duty without 1,000 --
sub-section (1) notice
62. Section 304 Failure to supply information by persons 500 --
incharge of burning or burial grounds
63. Section 308, Failure to give notice for removal of corpse of 500 --
sub-section (1) dead animals
clause (b)
64. Section 313 Setting a naked light 500 --
65. Section 320, Sale in municipal markets without permission 500 --
sub-section (1)
66. Section 324 Keeping market open without licence, etc. 2,000 --
67. Section 325 Sale in unlicensed market 500 --
68. Section 326 Carrying on business or trades near a market 500 --
69. Section 332 Keeping, abandonment or tethering of 300 which may 100
sub-section (3) animals, etc. extend to 2000
70. Section 334 Hawking articles for sale without a licence, 500 --
etc.
RITU GARG,
ADMINISTRATIVE SECRETARY TO GOVERNMENT, HARYANA,
LAW AND LEGISLATIVE DEPARTMENT.
12377—L.R.—H.G.P., Pkl.
