The Goa Animal Breeding and Domestication (Regulation and Compensation)
Act, 2025
Act No. 21 of 2025
DISCLAIMER: This document is being furnished to you for your information by PRS Legislative Research
(PRS). The contents of this document have been obtained from sources PRS believes to be reliable. These
contents have not been independently verified, and PRS makes no representation or warranty as to the accuracy,
completeness or correctness. In some cases the Principal Act and/or Amendment Act may not be available.
Principal Acts may or may not include subsequent amendments. For authoritative text, please contact the relevant
state department concerned or refer to the latest government publication or the gazette notification. Any person
using this material should take their own professional and legal advice before acting on any information contained
in this document. PRS or any persons connected with it do not accept any liability arising from the use of this
document. PRS or any persons connected with it shall not be in any way responsible for any loss, damage, or
distress to any person on account of any action taken or not taken on the basis of this document.
OFFICIAL GAZETTE — GOVT. OF GOA
SERIES I No. 24 (EXTRAORDINARY No. 4) 16TH SEPTEMBER, 2025
(2) It shall come into force on such date as the Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette,
appoint.
2. Amendment of Section 6.— In Section 6 of the Goa Private Universities Act, 2020 (Goa Act 4 of
2020), in sub-section (1), in clause (ii), after the expression “whichever is higher”, the expression “and may
possess an off-campus centre adhering to the guidelines of the regulatory body so as to start the operation
of the university in the initial stages until the expiry of the maximum period specified in sub-section (2) of
this section or until the main campus is established, whichever is earlier,” shall be inserted.
Secretariat, SANDIP JACQUES
Porvorim-Goa. Secretary to the Government of Goa,
Dated: 16-09-2025. Law Department (Legal Affairs).
---------
Notification
7/18/2025-LA/135 Date : 16-Sep-2025
The Goa Animal Breeding and Domestication (Regulation and Compensation) Act, 2025 (Goa Act 21
of 2025), which has been passed by the Legislative Assembly of Goa on 23-07-2025 and assented to by the
Governor of Goa on 11-09-2025, is hereby published for the general information of the public.
Dnyaneshwar Raut Dessai, Joint Secretary (Law).
---------
The Goa Animal Breeding and Domestication
(Regulation and Compensation) Act, 2025
(Goa Act No. 21 of 2025) [11-09-2025]
AN
ACT
to provide for regulation of breeding and domestication of animals and for the matters incidental thereto.
Be it enacted by the Legislative Assembly of Goa in the Seventy-sixth Year of the Republic of India as
follows:-
1. Short title, extent and commencement.— (1) This Act may be called the Goa Animal Breeding and
Domestication (Regulation and Compensation) Act, 2025.
(2) It shall extend to the whole of the State of Goa.
(3) It shall come into force at once.
2. Definitions.— In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,—
1050
OFFICIAL GAZETTE — GOVT. OF GOA
SERIES I No. 24 (EXTRAORDINARY No. 4) 16TH SEPTEMBER, 2025
(a) “breeding” means mating between two animals of either same or different breed to obtain
offspring with desired traits;
(b) “community service” means the work which the Court may order a convict to perform as a form of
punishment that benefits the community, for which he shall not be entitled to any remuneration.
(c) “competent authority” means an Officer not below the rank of the Deputy Collector authorised by
the Government, by notification in the Official Gazette, to perform functions of the competent authority
or functions incidental thereto under this Act;
(d) “Director” means Director of Animal Husbandry and Veterinary Services, Government of Goa;
(e) “domesticate” means keeping or possessing an animal;
(f) “ferocious animal” means dangerous and violent animal which may pose a danger to humans and
other animals;
(g) “Government” means the Government of Goa;
(h) “injury” means any bodily harm or hurt caused to any person or any animal;
(i) “Notification” means notification published in the Official Gazette;
(j) “owner” means the person in possession and control of an animal and includes any other person or
any other organisation or association in possession or custody of such animal;
(k) “sterilize” means a procedure which removes the capacity of the animal to reproduce.
3. Power to declare breed of animals to be ferocious animals.— (1) The Government may, by
notification published in the Official Gazette, declare any breed or class of animals to be ferocious animal.
(2) The Government, before issuing a notification under sub-section (1), shall issue a public notice
inviting objections from the general public to the proposed notification.
(3) Any person intending to make any objection or suggestion may, within a period of fifteen days from
the date of publication of notice under sub-section (2), forward the same to the Director.
(4) The Government may, after the expiry of said period of fifteen days and after considering the
objections and suggestions under sub-section (3), issue a notification under sub-section (1) above.
4. Prohibition on domestication and breeding of ferocious animals.— (1) No person after issuance of
notification under section 3, shall domesticate, breed or cause to breed any animal of the breed or class
specified in the said notification issued under sub-section (1) of Section 3.
(2) No person after issuance of notification under section 3 shall bring or cause to bring in the State of
Goa, an animal of the breed or class as specified in such notification.
5. Duties and liabilities of the Owner.— (1) The owner of the animal which is declared to be ferocious
animal under section 3 shall be solely responsible for the actions of such ferocious animal and he shall also
be liable if such ferocious animal injures any other human or animal.
1051
OFFICIAL GAZETTE — GOVT. OF GOA
SERIES I No. 24 (EXTRAORDINARY No. 4) 16TH SEPTEMBER, 2025
(2) The owner of such ferocious animal which has been notified under Section 3 shall within 30 days
from the publication of the notification, inform in writing to the Director about the existence of such
ferocious animal in his possession, with such details and in such form as prescribed by rules.
(3) The owner of such ferocious animal shall, within 60 days from the issuance of notification under
Section 3, sterilize or cause to sterilize such breed or class of animal and the Director shall upon
application from the owner, shall issue a certificate confirming that the ferocious animal has been duly
sterilized.
6. Penalty.— (1) Whoever domesticates, breeds or causes to breed any breed or class of animals in
contravention of any of the provisions of this Act or the rules made thereunder, shall be punished with a
simple imprisonment for a period which may extend to 3 months but shall not be less than 15 days, fine of
rupees fifty thousand and community service.
(2) Whoever contravenes any of the provisions of this Act for which no separate penalty is specified in
this Act, shall be punishable with a simple imprisonment for a period upto 1 month, fine of rupees fifty
thousand and community service:
Provided that the court may, in its discretion having regard to the nature of the offence, the background
of the accused and the circumstances of each case, order the accused to render community service in lieu of
the imprisonment.
7. Compensation.— (1) Notwithstanding anything contained in this Act or any other law for the time
being in force, any person who is injured and in case of death, the legal representative of such deceased
person, may file a claim for compensation against the owner of any animal which has caused such injury or
death.
(2) The claim shall be filed within six months from the date of the incident before the Competent
Authority having jurisdiction over the region where the incident causing injury or death took place.
(3) The Competent Authority shall after conducting a summary inquiry as provided under Order
XXXVII of the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908 (5 of 1908), decide such claim within 3 months of such
claim being made.
(4) Any person aggrieved by the decision of the Competent Authority may file an appeal to the
Administrative Tribunal of Goa, within 60 days from the date of the decision of the Competent Authority:
Provided that the Administrative Tribunal may for sufficient cause condone the delay in filing the appeal
for a maximum period of 1 year.
(5) The order passed by the Administrative Tribunal shall be final and shall not be called in question in
any original suit, application or execution proceeding and no injunction shall be granted by any court or
other authority in respect of any action taken or to be taken in pursuance of any power conferred by or
under this section.
(6) The remedy under this section shall not be in derogation of any civil or criminal remedy which is
available to any person.
8. Register of Ferocious Animals.— The Director shall maintain a register containing all the particulars
of the owners and the ferocious animals in possession of such owners.
1052
OFFICIAL GAZETTE — GOVT. OF GOA
SERIES I No. 24 (EXTRAORDINARY No. 4) 16TH SEPTEMBER, 2025
9. Power of Government to make rules.— The Government may, by Notification in the Official Gazette,
make rules for the purpose of carrying into effect the provisions of this Act.
10. Power to remove difficulty.— If any difficulty arises in giving effect to the provisions of this Act, the
Government, may, within 3 years of commencement of this Act, from time to time, by order published in
the Official Gazette make such provisions, not inconsistent with the provisions of this Act, do or cause to
be done anything which may be necessary or expedient for removing the difficulty.
11. Protection of action taken in good faith.— No suit, prosecution or other legal proceeding shall lie
against the Government or the statutory authority or the appellate authority, officer, in respect of anything
which is in good faith done or intended to be done in pursuance of this Act or of any rules or orders made
thereunder.
Secretariat, SANDIP JACQUES
Porvorim-Goa. Secretary to the Government of Goa,
Dated: 16-09-2025. Law Department (Legal Affairs).
www.goaprintingpress.gov.in
Published by the Director, Printing & Stationary,
Government Printing Press,
Mahatma Gandhi Road, Panaji-Goa 403 001.
Price—Rs. 5.00
1053
PRINTED AT GOVERNMENT PRINTING PRESS, PANAJI-GOA—206/100-9/2025.
