The Andhra Pradesh Scheduled Castes (Sub-Classification) Act, 2025
Act No. 22 of 2025
DISCLAIMER: This document is being furnished to you for your information by PRS Legislative Research
(PRS). The contents of this document have been obtained from sources PRS believes to be reliable. These
contents have not been independently verified, and PRS makes no representation or warranty as to the accuracy,
completeness or correctness. In some cases the Principal Act and/or Amendment Act may not be available.
Principal Acts may or may not include subsequent amendments. For authoritative text, please contact the relevant
state department concerned or refer to the latest government publication or the gazette notification. Any person
using this material should take their own professional and legal advice before acting on any information contained
in this document. PRS or any persons connected with it do not accept any liability arising from the use of this
document. PRS or any persons connected with it shall not be in any way responsible for any loss, damage, or
distress to any person on account of any action taken or not taken on the basis of this document.
24th OCTOBER, 2025] ANDHRA PRADESH GAZETTE EXTRAORDINARY 1
Registered No. HSE/49. [Price : Rs.2-00 Paise

THE ANDHRA PRADESH GAZETTE
PART IV-B EXTRAORDINARY
PUBLISHED BY AUTHORITY
No. 22] AMARAVATI, FRIDAY, 24th OCTOBER, 2025.
ANDHRA PRADESH ACTS, ORDINANCES AND
REGULATIONS Etc.,
The following Act of the Andhra Pradesh Legislature received the assent
of the Governor on the 17th October, 2025 and the said assent is hereby first
published on the 24th October, 2025 in the Andhra Pradesh Gazette for general
information :
ACT No. 22 of 2025
AN ACT TO PROVIDE FOR THE SUB-CLASSIFICATION OF SCHEDULED
CASTES IN THE STATE OF ANDHRA PRADESH TO ENSURE THEIR
UNIFIED AND UNIFORM PROGRESS IN THE SOCIETY.
Be it enacted by the Legislature of the State of Andhra Pradesh in the
Seventy-sixth Year of the Republic of India as follows : -
1. (1) This Act may be called the Andhra Pradesh Scheduled Short title and
commencement.
Castes (Sub-classification) Act, 2025.
(2) It extends to the whole of the State of Andhra Pradesh.
(3) It shall be deemed to have come into force with effect on
and from the 17th April, 2025.
2. (1) In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires, - Definitions.
(a) ‘Educational Institution’ shall have the meaning
assigned to it in clause (c) of section 2 of the Andhra Pradesh
Educational Institutions (Regulation of Admission and
Prohibition of Capitation Fee) Act, 1983;
Job No.4-91 [1]
2 ANDHRA PRADESH GAZETTE EXTRAORDINARY [PART IV-B
A.P. Act No.5 (b) ‘Government’ means the State Government of Andhra
of 1983.
Pradesh;
(c) ‘Prescribed’ means prescribed by the rules made under
this Act;
(d) ‘Public Service’ means, services in any office or
establishment of, -
(i) the Government;
(ii) a local authority, i.e.,
A.P. Act No.13 of (a) A Gram Panchayat or a Mandal Parishad or a Zilla
1994.
Parishad established under the Andhra Pradesh Panchayat
Raj Act, 1994;
(b) A Municipality constituted under the Andhra Pradesh
A.P. Act No.6 of
1965. Municipalities Act, 1965; and
(c) A Municipal Corporation established under the relevant
law, for the time being in force, relating to Municipal
Corporations;
(iii) A Corporation or undertaking wholly owned or controlled by
the Government;
(iv) A body established under any law made by the Legislature of
the State whether incorporated or not including a University; and
(v) Any other body established by the State Government or by a
Society registered under any law relating to the registration of
Societies for the time being in force and receiving funds from
the Government either fully or partly, for its maintenance or any
Educational Institution, whether registered or not, but receiving
aid from the Government;
(e) ‘Rule of Reservation’ means any rule or provision, for reservation
of appointments or posts in public service in the special rules
applicable to any particular service or the General Rules of the
Andhra Pradesh State and Subordinate Service Rules, 1996
as the case may be or any rule or provision for reservation of
seats in the rules or instructions for admission into Educational
Institutions, as the case may be, in favour of Scheduled Castes
24th OCTOBER, 2025] ANDHRA PRADESH GAZETTE EXTRAORDINARY 3
or Scheduled Tribes or Backward Classes or Women;
(f) ‘Backlog Vacancies’ means the vacancies which were carry
forwarded from previous recruitments.
(g) ‘Scheduled Castes’ shall have the meaning assigned to it in
clause (24) of article 366 of the Constitution of India.
In order to secure social justice and equality of opportunity and 3(a) Sub-
classification.
to ensure fair, just, reasonable, rational and equitable enjoyment
of the benefits of the rule of reservation by all the Scheduled
Castes with respect to the State of Andhra Pradesh, the
Government of Andhra Pradesh have sub-classified the fifty nine
(59) sub castes of Scheduled castes into three groups which
are identified based on Population, inter-se backwardness, and
social cohesion. The Percentage of reservation for the three
groups shall be at the rate specified in sub-section (b),
sub-section (c) and sub-section (d) of this section.
Provided that the reservation as specified under this
section to the three groups shall be subject to the availability of
eligible candidates.
(b) One percent of appointments or posts or seats so reserved
under the rule of reservation for the Scheduled Castes shall be
reserved to the persons belonging to the following Scheduled
Castes, which shall be referred to as Scheduled Castes Group-I.
4 ANDHRA PRADESH GAZETTE EXTRAORDINARY [PART IV-B
(c) Six and half percent of appointments or posts or seats so
reserved under the rule of reservation for the Scheduled Castes
shall be reserved to the persons belonging to the following
Scheduled Castes, which shall be referred to as Scheduled
Castes Group-II.
(d) Seven and half percent of appointments or posts or seats so
reserved under the rule of reservation for the Scheduled Castes
shall be reserved to the persons belonging to the following
Scheduled Castes, which shall be referred to as Scheduled
Castes Group-III.
24th OCTOBER, 2025] ANDHRA PRADESH GAZETTE EXTRAORDINARY 5
6 ANDHRA PRADESH GAZETTE EXTRAORDINARY [PART IV-B
(e) Roster Point
A 200 point roster system shall be adopted for earmarking of
roster points to the three groups of Scheduled Castes as
mentioned in this section. The 200 point roster system shall
operate in two (2) cycles each numbered from 1-100.
The following roster points shall be earmarked for Group- I,
Group-II and Group-Ill in the first cycle.
In the second cycle of 100 points, roster system, roster point
97 shall be earmarked to Group-II, thereby ensuring that Group-
II and Group-Ill receive the percentage of reservation as
specified under sub-section (c) and sub-section (d) of section 3.
The following roster points shall be earmarked for Group-I.
Group - II and Group - III in the second cycle.
Backlog 4. The percentage of Reservations specified at Sections 3 shall
Vacancies.
be applicable for filling up of Backlog Vacancies pertaining to
public appointments.
Act not to 5. Nothing contained in this Act shall apply to any appointment or
apply to
post or service of any department of the Central Government or
Cetral
Government of any Corporation or Undertaking owned or controlled by the
Services or
Central Government or to any Educational Insstitution belonging
Educational
Institutions. to or under the control of the Central Government.
24th OCTOBER, 2025] ANDHRA PRADESH GAZETTE EXTRAORDINARY 7
6. No suit, prosecution or other legal proceedings shall lie against Protection of
action taken in
any authority or person for anything done or purported to have
good faith.
been done in good faith in pursuance of the provisions of this
Act or the rules made there under.
7. If any doubt or difficulty arises in giving effect to the provisions Power to
remove doubts
of this Act, the Government may, by order, make such provisions
and diffculties.
or give such directions, not inconsistent with the provisions of
this Act, as may appear to it to be necessary or expedient for
the removal of the doubt or difficulty.
8. (1) The Government may, by notification in the Andhra Pradesh Power to make
rules.
Gazette, make rules to carry out the purposes of this Act.
(2) In particular and without prejudice to the generality of the
foregoing powers, such rules may provide for all or any of the
following matters, namely,-
(a) Fixation or adjustment of roster points in respect of
Scheduled Castes for the purposes of public service;
(b) Procedure to be followed in case of non-availability of
eligible persons for compliance with section 3; and
(c) Any other matter which has to be or may be prescribed.
(3) Every rule made under this Act shall immediately after it is made,
be laid before the State Legislature if it is in session and if it is
not in session, in the session immediately following for a total
period of fourteen days which may be comprised in one session
or in two successive sessions, and if, before the expiration of
the session in which it is so laid or the session immediately
following, the Legislature agree in making any modifications in
the rule or in the annulment of the rule, the rule shall, with effect
from the date of notification of such modification or annulment
is notified, have effect only in such modified form or shall stand
annulled as the case may be so however, that any such
modification or annulment shall be without prejudice to the
validity of anything previously done under that rule.
8 ANDHRA PRADESH GAZETTE EXTRAORDINARY [PART IV-B
9. For the removal of doubts, it is hereby declared that nothing
Removal of
doubts. contained in this Act shall be construed as inclusion in or
exclusion from or further classification of the list of Scheduled
Castes with respect to the State of Andhra Pradesh as specified
in the constitution (Scheduled Castes) Order, 1950 and its
Amendments.
Repeal and
10. (1) The Andhra Pradesh Scheduled Castes (Sub-classification)
savings of
Ordinance Ordinance, 2025 is hereby repealed.
No.2 of 2025.
(2) Notwithstanding such repeal, anything done or any action taken
under the said Ordinance shall be deemed to have been done
or taken under this Act.
GOTTAPU PRATIBHA DEVI,
Secretary to Government,
Legal and Legislative Affairs & Justice,
Law Department.
24th OCTOBER, 2025] ANDHRA PRADESH GAZETTE EXTRAORDINARY 9
STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
The State of Andhra Pradesh recognizes fifty-nine (59) Scheduled
Castes listed under the Scheduled Castes category and extends a 15%
reservation in public sector employment and educational institutions to these
communities. In accordance with Article 46 of the Directive Principles of State
Policy (Part IV) of the Constitution of India, the State is committed to protect
the interests of Scheduled Castes, preventing social injustice and exploitation,
and fostering their overall development. Additionally, as enshrined in Article
38(2) of the Directive Principles, the State endeavours to eliminate inequalities
in status, facilities, and opportunities, not only among individuals but also
among groups residing in different regions and engaged in diverse vocations.
The constitutional mandate upholds social justice and equality of
opportunity, as reflected in the Preamble and Fundamental Rights, particularly
the Right to Equality (Articles 14 to 16), in conjunction with Articles 38, 39, 41,
and 46. These provisions emphasize protective discrimination to minimize
inequalities and uplift socially and educationally backward communities,
including Scheduled Castes. To achieve these constitutional goals and ensure
collective progress, the Government of Andhra Pradesh is committed to the
equitable distribution of reservation benefits among all Scheduled Castes,
thereby ensuring their equal and fair access to opportunities in both education
and employment.
In this context, the Hon’ble Supreme Court consisting of (7) Judges
has pronounced its judgment in W.P.Civil Appeal No.2317 of 2011 combined
with other petitions including W.P.(C) No.562 of 2022, Dt. 01.08.2024 regarding
Sub Classification within the Scheduled Castes. Out of (7) Judges bench, (6)
Judges opined that the validity of sub-classification within Scheduled Castes
has been held to be constitutionally permissible. In pursuant to the above
Judgement, Government constituted a One-Man Commission with Sri Rajiv
Ranjan Mishra, I.A.S., (Retd.) under COI Act to suggest specific
recommendations on sub-classification of Scheduled Castes among the
various sub-groups of Scheduled Castes in the State of Andhra Pradesh vide
10 ANDHRA PRADESH GAZETTE EXTRAORDINARY [PART IV-B
GO.Ms.No.86, S.W.(CV) Dept. Dt. 15.11.2024. Government have
approved the recommendations of OMC to implement the sub-classification
among Scheduled Castes for ensuring a fair and equitable distribution of
reservation benefits.
The following are the grouping of 59 castes and their proposed
percentage of reservation:
As the Legislature of the State was then not in session and having
been prorogued and it has been decided to give effect to the above provisions
immediately, the Governor has promulgated the Andhra Pradesh Scheduled
Castes (Sub-classification) Ordinance, 2025 on 16th April, 2025 and the same
has been published in Telugu and English in Part IV - B, extraordinary of the
Andhra Pradesh Gazette, dated 17th April, 2025 (Andhra Pradesh Ordinance
No.2 of 2025).
GOTTAPU PRATIBHA DEVI,
Secretary to Government,
Legal and Legislative Affairs & Justice,
Law Department.
Printed by the Commissioner of Printing at A.P. Legislative Assembly Printing Press, Amaravati.
