The Andhra Pradesh Agricultural Land (Conversion for Non Agricultural
Purposes) (Repeal) Act, 2025
Act No. 20 of 2025
DISCLAIMER: This document is being furnished to you for your information by PRS Legislative Research
(PRS). The contents of this document have been obtained from sources PRS believes to be reliable. These
contents have not been independently verified, and PRS makes no representation or warranty as to the accuracy,
completeness or correctness. In some cases the Principal Act and/or Amendment Act may not be available.
Principal Acts may or may not include subsequent amendments. For authoritative text, please contact the relevant
state department concerned or refer to the latest government publication or the gazette notification. Any person
using this material should take their own professional and legal advice before acting on any information contained
in this document. PRS or any persons connected with it do not accept any liability arising from the use of this
document. PRS or any persons connected with it shall not be in any way responsible for any loss, damage, or
distress to any person on account of any action taken or not taken on the basis of this document.
24th OCTOBER, 2025] ANDHRA PRADESH GAZETTE EXTRAORDINARY 1
Registered No. HSE/49. [Price : Rs.2-00 Paise

THE ANDHRA PRADESH GAZETTE
PART IV-B EXTRAORDINARY
PUBLISHED BY AUTHORITY
No. 20] AMARAVATI, FRIDAY, 24th OCTOBER, 2025.
ANDHRA PRADESH ACTS, ORDINANCES AND
REGULATIONS Etc.,
The following Act of the Andhra Pradesh Legislature received the assent
of the Governor on the 15th October, 2025 and the said assent is hereby first
published on the 24th October, 2025 in the Andhra Pradesh Gazette for general
information :
ACT No. 20 of 2025
AN ACT TO REPEAL THE ANDHRA PRADESH AGRICULTURAL LAND
(CONVERSION FOR NON AGRICULTURAL PURPOSES) ACT, 2006
(ACT NO.3 OF 2006).
Be it enacted by the Legislature of the State of Andhra Pradesh in the
Seventy-sixth Year of the Republic of India as follows : -
1. (1) This Act may be called the Andhra Pradesh Agricultural Land Short Title and
commencement.
(Conversion for Non Agricultural Purposes) (Repeal) Act, 2025.
(2) It shall be deemed to have come into force from 3rd September,
2025.
2. The Andhra Pradesh Agricultural Land (Conversion for Non Repeal of Act 3
of 2006.
Agricultural Purposes) Act, 2006 (hereinafter referred to as the
Principal Act) is hereby repealed except to the extent hereinafter
saved.
3. On repeal of the Principal Act,- Savings and
transitional
(1) General Savings: Any action taken or anything duly done or
provisions.
suffered under the repealed Act shall, insofar as it is not inconsistent
Job No.4-88 [1]
2 ANDHRA PRADESH GAZETTE EXTRAORDINARY [PART IV-B
with the provisions of any other law for the time being in force, be
deemed to have been taken or done under the corresponding
provisions of that law and shall continue to be in force accordingly,
unless and until superseded or modified by any action taken or
anything done under such other law. The repeal shall not affect
any right, obligation, or liability acquired, accrued, or incurred
under the repealed Act. The repeal shall not affect any
investigation, legal proceeding, or remedy in respect of any such
right, obligation, liability, penalty, forfeiture, or punishment as
aforesaid, and any such investigation, legal proceeding, or remedy
may be instituted, continued, or enforced, and any such penalty,
forfeiture, or punishment may be imposed as if this Act had not
been enacted. Any rules made or notifications issued under the
repealed Act and in force immediately before the commencement
of this Act shall, to the extent that they are not inconsistent with
the provisions of any other applicable law, continue to be in force
until they are superseded or rescinded by any rules or notifications
made or issued under such other law. Any assessment, levy, or
collection of conversion tax, penalty, or other dues initiated or
made under the repealed Act shall continue to be valid and may
be completed or recovered in accordance with the provisions of
the repealed Act, as if this Act had not been enacted.
(2) Pending Applications:
(i) All applications for conversion of agricultural land for non
agricultural purposes made under the repealed Act and pending
immediately before the commencement of this Act shall be dealt
with and disposed of in accordance with the provisions of the
repealed Act, as if this Act had not been enacted.
(ii) Notwithstanding anything contained in the repealed Act or any
rules made thereunder, all unauthorized layouts shall stand validly
converted for non agricultural purposes under the repealed Act,
subject to the payment of the conversion tax on the basic value of
the land that was in force during the respective period of the
unauthorized layout, without the imposition of any penalty or
interest. However, this provision shall remain in force for a period
of one year from the date of commencement of this Act. Nothing
in this clause shall exempt or safeguard such defaulters from the
initiation of proceedings under the Andhra Pradesh Revenue
24th OCTOBER, 2025] ANDHRA PRADESH GAZETTE EXTRAORDINARY 3
Recovery Act, 1864 (Act No.II of 1864), for the recovery of the
aforementioned dues.
4. (1) If any difficulty arises in giving effect to the provisions of this Power to remove
difficulties.
Act, the State Government may, by order, do anything not inconsistent with the
provisions of this Act as may appear to it to be necessary or expedient for
removing the difficulty:
Provided that no such order shall be made after the expiry of two years
from the date of commencement of this Act.
(2) Every order made under the sub-section (1) shall be laid, as soon
as may be after it is made, before each House of Legislature.
5. (1) The Andhra Pradesh Agricultural Land (Conversion for Non
Repeal and
Agricultural Purposes) (Repeal) Ordinance, 2025 is hereby repealed. savings.
(2) Notwithstanding such repeal anything done or any action taken Ordinance
No.5 of 2025.
under the said Ordinance shall be deemed to have been done or taken under
this Act.
GOTTAPU PRATIBHA DEVI,
Secretary to Government,
Legal and Legislative Affairs & Justice,
Law Department.
4 ANDHRA PRADESH GAZETTE EXTRAORDINARY [PART IV-B
STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
The Andhra Pradesh Non Agricultural Lands Assessment Act, 1963
(Act No. 14 of 1963) was enacted to establish a legal framework for the levy of
assessment on lands that are not used for agricultural purposes within the
State of Andhra Pradesh.
The Andhra Pradesh Non Agricultural Lands Assessment Act, 1963
(Act No. 14 of 1963) was repealed and the Andhra Pradesh Agricultural Land
(Conversion for Non Agricultural Purposes) Act, 2006 (Act No. 3 of 2006) was
enacted to regulate the conversion of agricultural land to non agricultural
purposes and for matters connected therewith.
However, with the passage of time and in light of the present
circumstances, it has been observed that the regulatory framework for land
development, including the development of agricultural land, is substantially
addressed by various local authorities and urban development authorities
under their respective statutes, such as the Andhra Pradesh Metropolitan
Region and Urban Development Authorities Act, 2016. These authorities are
already empowered to regulate land use and levy development charges,
leading to a redundancy in the simultaneous regulation of agricultural land
conversion under the said Act, 2006.
In line with the Government’s policy to promote ‘speed of Doing
Business’, the process of seeking conversion under the said Act, 2006 has
been perceived as cumbersome and involving unnecessary procedural
complexities. The prevailing administrative processes and the need for a more
citizen-centric approach necessitate the simplification of regulatory
mechanisms.
Considering the above, the Government has decided that the
continuation of the Andhra Pradesh Agricultural Land (Conversion for Non
Agricultural Purposes) Act, 2006 is no longer relevant or necessary and that
its repeal is a crucial step towards promoting good governance. This repeal
will avoid duplication of regulatory functions and facilitate a more efficient and
simplified process for land development within the framework of other existing
laws while ensuring the protection of actions already taken and pending matters,
and also making certain transitory provisions for pending matters and
unauthorized layout.
24th OCTOBER, 2025] ANDHRA PRADESH GAZETTE EXTRAORDINARY 5
Accordingly, it has been decided to repeal the Andhra Pradesh
Agricultural Land (Conversion for Non Agricultural Purposes) Act, 2006 (Act
No. 3 of 2006)
As the Legislature of the State of Andhra Pradesh is not therein
session, having been prorogued, and it has been decided to give effect to the
above decision immediately, the Andhra Pradesh Agricultural Land
(Conversion for Non Agricultural Purposes) (Repeal) Ordinance, 2025
[Ordinance No.5 of 2025] was promulgated by the Governor on 1st September,
2025, which was published in Andhra Pradesh Gazette dated 3rd September,
2025.
GOTTAPU PRATIBHA DEVI,
Secretary to Government,
Legal and Legislative Affairs & Justice,
Law Department.
Printed by the Commissioner of Printing at A.P. Legislative Assembly Printing Press, Amaravati.
