The Malayalam Language Act, 2025
Act No. 3 of 2026
DISCLAIMER: This document is being furnished to you for your information by PRS Legislative Research
(PRS). The contents of this document have been obtained from sources PRS believes to be reliable. These
contents have not been independently verified, and PRS makes no representation or warranty as to the accuracy,
completeness or correctness. In some cases the Principal Act and/or Amendment Act may not be available.
Principal Acts may or may not include subsequent amendments. For authoritative text, please contact the relevant
state department concerned or refer to the latest government publication or the gazette notification. Any person
using this material should take their own professional and legal advice before acting on any information contained
in this document. PRS or any persons connected with it do not accept any liability arising from the use of this
document. PRS or any persons connected with it shall not be in any way responsible for any loss, damage, or
distress to any person on account of any action taken or not taken on the basis of this document.
11
GOVERNMENT OF KERALA
Law (Legislation B) Department
-
NOTIFICATION
No. 104/Leg.B1/2025/Law. Dated, Thiruvananthapuram, 5th March, 2026
21st Kumbham, 1201
14th Phalguna, 1947.
In pursuance of clause (3) of Article 348 of the Constitution of India, the Governor of
Kerala is pleased to authorise the publication in the Gazette of the following translation in
English Language of the Malayalam Language Act, 2025 (3 of 2026).
By order of the Governor,
K. G. SANAL KUMAR,
Law Secretary.
This is a digitally signed Gazette.
Authenticity may be verified through https://compose.kerala.gov.in/
12
[Translation in English of “2025 ” published under the
-ടേ മേയാളഭാഷാ ആേ്റ്
authority of the Governor.]
ACT 3 OF 2026
THE MALAYALAM LANGUAGE ACT, 2025
An Act to provide for the adoption of Malayalam language as the official language of the State
of Kerala and Malayalam to be used for all official purposes, to provide for the
application of Malayalam language in all sectors in Kerala, subject to the provisions of
the Constitution of India, to ensure the growth, dissemination, enrichment and
protection of Malayalam language and for matters connected therewith or incidental
thereto.
Preamble.—WHEREAS, it is expedient to provide for the adoption of Malayalam
language as the official language of the State of Kerala and Malayalam to be used for all
official purposes, to provide for the application of Malayalam language in all sectors in
Kerala, subject to the provisions of the Constitution of India, to ensure the growth,
dissemination, enrichment and protection of Malayalam language and for matters connected
therewith or incidental thereto;
BE it enacted in the Seventy-sixth Year of the Republic of India as follows:—
CHAPTER I
PRELIMINARY
1. Short title and commencement.—(1) This Act may be called the Malayalam
Language Act, 2025.
(2) It shall come into force at once.
2. Definitions.—In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,—
(a) “authorised officer” means Secretary to the Government in charge of the
administration of this Act or such officer as may be authorised by him;
(b) “first language” means the language which shall compulsorily be taught as part
of linguistics;
This is a digitally signed Gazette.
Authenticity may be verified through https://compose.kerala.gov.in/
13
(c) “Government” means the Government of Kerala;
(d) “linguistic minorities” means the people who traditionally use Tamil and
Kannada languages for communication and who domiciled in areas declared as linguistic
minority in the State of Kerala;
(e) “official language” means the language used for official communication in the
State;
(f) "prescribed" means prescribed by rules made under this Act;
(g) “State” means State of Kerala.
CHAPTER II
MALAYALAM LANGUAGE DEVELOPMENT DEPARTMENT AND
MALAYALAM LANGUAGE DEVELOPMENT DIRECTORATE
3. Malayalam Language Development Department and Malayalam Language
Development Directorate.—(1) The existing Personnel and Administrative Reforms (Official
Language) Department in the Government Secretariat shall be renamed as the Malayalam
Language Development Department.
(2) The Government shall constitute a Malayalam Language Development
Directorate under the control of the Department under sub-section (1), by re-deploying the
officers of various department of the Government and such Directorate shall perform the
duties, as may be prescribed.
CHAPTER III
USE OF OFFICIAL LANGUAGE
4. Legislative Sector.—(1) Subject to the Official Languages Act, 1963 (Central Act 19
of 1963), in relation to the law making in the State,—
(i) in Bills to be introduced in, and in Acts passed by, the Kerala Legislative
Assembly;
(ii) in all Ordinances promulgated by the Governor of Kerala under Article 213
of the Constitution of India;
This is a digitally signed Gazette.
Authenticity may be verified through https://compose.kerala.gov.in/
14
(iii) in all orders, rules, regulations or bye-laws issued by the Government
under the Constitution of India, or under any law made by the Parliament or the Kerala
Legislative Assembly
the language to be used shall be Malayalam and when Malayalam language is so used, a
translation thereof in English shall also be published.
(2) Important Central Acts and State Acts published in English shall be translated
into Malayalam, incorporating amendments made therein, within such period, as may be
prescribed.
(3) The rules made under enactments and published in English shall also be
published in Malayalam within such period as may be prescribed.
5. Official Language Sector.—(1) Subject to Articles 346 and 347 of the Constitution
of India, the language to be used for all official purposes in the State of Kerala shall be
Malayalam.
(2) Sub-section (1) shall be applicable to all existing Departments and all
Departments to be newly constituted under the State Government and Local Self Government
Institutions and Quasi-Governmental Institutions, Autonomous, Co-operative, Public sector
Undertakings under the Government:
Provided that English may be used for correspondence with the Government of India,
Institutions under the Government of India, foreign countries, other States, High Court,
Supreme Court etc., and in any other circumstances where English has to be used as provided
by law and with people speaking languages other than Tamil and Kannada, the minority
languages in the State.
6. Education and Research Sector.—(1) Malayalam shall be the compulsory first
language in all Government and aided schools in Kerala up to the Xth Standard.
(2) Steps shall be taken to promote dissemination of Malayalam language in all
schools in the State.
(3) Students whose mother tongue is any language other than Malayalam,
opportunity shall be given to study Malayalam language in addition to their mother tongue.
This is a digitally signed Gazette.
Authenticity may be verified through https://compose.kerala.gov.in/
15
7. Special provisions regarding other State-Linguistic Minorities.—Notwithstanding
anything contained in Section 5 or Section 6,—
(1) The Tamil and Kannada linguistic minorities in the State may use their
languages for their correspondence with the State Government Secretariat, Heads of
Department and all local offices of the State Government situated in those areas declared by
the Government to be linguistic minority areas for the purpose and replies send in such case
shall be in their respective minority languages.
(2) Students, whose mother tongue is any language other than Malayalam may
choose languages of their choice and are available in the schools of the State in accordance
with the National Education Curriculum.
(3) With respect to students who come from other States and foreign countries to
Kerala for studying, it is not compulsory to write the Malayalam examination in IXth
Standard, Xth Standard and Higher Secondary Level.
8. Unified Script Layout.—A unified script layout shall be implemented in the manner
as may be prescribed in accordance with the development of Science and Technology.
CHAPTER IV
LANGUAGE IN THE COURT
9. Language in the court.—(1) With the permission of the High Court, measures shall
be taken in a phased manner, to translate all proceedings, including the judgments and
language used in courts up to the District Courts into Malayalam. For that purpose, the
Government shall provide required infrastructure facilities, as may be prescribed.
(2) A system, as may be prescribed shall be established at the district level for
translating judgments into English, required for filing appeal before the High Court.
(3) Notwithstanding anything contained in any other Act, the orders or judgments
of all institutions under the Government having quasi-judicial powers shall be in Malayalam
Language:
Provided that orders relating to linguistic minorities shall be made available in their
mother tongue or English.
This is a digitally signed Gazette.
Authenticity may be verified through https://compose.kerala.gov.in/
16
CHAPTER V
GENERAL MEASURES FOR THE DISSEMINATION OF LANGUAGE
10. General Measures for the dissemination of language.—(1) The board displaying the
name of the Government undertakings or autonomous bodies, co-operative and public
undertakings, name of the officers and designations and the boards used in the vehicles under
the control of such institutions shall also be in Malayalam and in English as may be prescribed.
(2) The first half of boards displaying the names of commercial-industrial and
business undertakings, trusts, counselling centres, hospitals, laboratories, amusement centres
and hotels functioning with the approval and sanction of Government or Local Self
Government Institutions, shall be in Malayalam and the second half shall be in English.
(3) The particulars displayed on the boards erected under the supervision of various
departments in Government, quasi-government and co-operative institutions and Local Self
Government Institutions of the State, shall be in Malayalam. If necessary, such boards may
be displayed in English or in other language as may be prescribed.
(4) The boards erected in relation to works carried out, by accepting consideration
from the Government or Local Self Government Institutions shall be displayed giving
prominence to Malayalam.
(5) Boards, advertisements, bills, notices etc. in connection with any project under
the Government or implemented, with any kind of consideration, grant, concession from
Government or allied Institutions or Local Self Government Institutions shall be in
Malayalam.
(6) In all industrial products manufactured and sold in the State, the name of the
products and directions for its use shall also be in Malayalam.
(7) Advertisements and notifications issued by the Government intended for
publication within Kerala shall be in Malayalam:
Provided that such advertisements may be published in the respective language if
necessary in the medias published in other languages.
This is a digitally signed Gazette.
Authenticity may be verified through https://compose.kerala.gov.in/
17
(8) The pamphlets, informations, notices etc. of programmes conducted by
Government shall be made available in Malayalam.
(9) A fixed percentage of the size of the boards, displaying advertisements and
notices published for the information of the general public, in the State, and the Government
advertisements published in newspapers, periodicals etc. in the State shall be in Malayalam.
For this purpose, the classification of advertisements, the number/percentage of portions of
advertisements to be displayed in Malayalam shall be, in such manner as may be prescribed.
Except where the use of English is essential, the advertisement shall be in Malayalam:
Provided that advertisements, intimations, boards and notices published for the
information of the Tamil and Kannada linguistic minority areas shall also be published in the
minority language of the respective area.
CHAPTER VI
USE OF MALAYALAM LANGUAGE IN INFORMATION AND TECHNOLOGY SECTOR
11. Use of Malayalam language in Information and Technology Sector.—(1)
Information Technology Department shall take initiatives to develop in the prescribed manner,
open source software and accessories for the efficient use of Malayalam language in the field
of Information Technology.
(2) The information in the websites of various departments of Government, Quasi-
Governmental Institutions, Public Sector Undertakings, Autonomous Bodies, Co-operative
Societies shall also be made available in Malayalam as well, the default page shall be in
Malayalam and the website shall be equipped for selecting the language to be used therein.
(3) The facility shall be made available for the use of Malayalam in the
e-governance projects (including mobile governance) being implemented in the Government
departments.
12. Incentives for the dissemination of Malayalam Language.—Scheme shall be
formulated for providing incentives to persons who provide creative suggestions to the
Government for the effective dissemination of Malayalam language in the field of Information
Technology also.
This is a digitally signed Gazette.
Authenticity may be verified through https://compose.kerala.gov.in/
18
13. Act not to override the effect of other laws.—The provisions of this Act shall be in
addition to the provisions of existing laws and shall not have overriding effect.
14. Power to make rules.—(1) The Government may, by notification in the Gazette,
make rules, either prospectively or retrospectively, for carrying out the purposes of this Act.
(2) Every rule made under this Act shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is made,
before the Legislative Assembly while it is in session for a total period of fourteen days which
may be comprised in one session or in two successive sessions, and if, before the expiry of
the session in which it is so laid or the session immediately following, the Legislative
Assembly makes any modification in the rule or decides that the rule should not be made, the
rule shall thereafter have effect only in such modified form or be of no effect, as the case may
be; so however that any such modification or annulment shall be without prejudice to the
validity of anything previously done under that rule.
15. Power to remove difficulties.—(1) If any difficulty arises in giving effect to the
provisions of this Act, the Government may, by order published in the Gazette, make
provisions not inconsistent with the provisions of this Act which appear to be necessary or
expedient, for removing the difficulty:
Provided that no such order shall be made after the expiry of a period of two years from
the date of commencement of this Act.
(2) Every order made under sub-section (1) shall, as soon as may be after it is
made, be laid before the Legislative Assembly.
16. Repeal and Saving.—(1) The Kerala Official Languages Act, 1969 (7 of 1969) is
hereby repealed.
(2) Notwithstanding such repeal, anything done or any action taken under the said
Act shall be deemed to have been done or taken under this Act.
____________________________________________________________________________________________________________________________
PUBLISHED BY THE SUPERINTENDENT OF GOVERNMENT PRESSES
AT THE GOVERNMENT CENTRAL PRESS, THIRUVANANTHAPURAM, 2026
This is a digitally signed Gazette.
Authenticity may be verified through https://compose.kerala.gov.in/
