Dr. H. Narasimaiah Science, Educational, Cultural and Tourism Development
Authority
Act, 2025
Act No. 32 of 2025
DISCLAIMER: This document is being furnished to you for your information by PRS Legislative Research
(PRS). The contents of this document have been obtained from sources PRS believes to be reliable. These
contents have not been independently verified, and PRS makes no representation or warranty as to the accuracy,
completeness or correctness. In some cases the Principal Act and/or Amendment Act may not be available.
Principal Acts may or may not include subsequent amendments. For authoritative text, please contact the relevant
state department concerned or refer to the latest government publication or the gazette notification. Any person
using this material should take their own professional and legal advice before acting on any information contained
in this document. PRS or any persons connected with it do not accept any liability arising from the use of this
document. PRS or any persons connected with it shall not be in any way responsible for any loss, damage, or
distress to any person on account of any action taken or not taken on the basis of this document.
24
PARLIAMENTARY AFFAIRS AND LEGISLATION SECRETARIAT
NOTIFICATION
NO.DPAL 30 SHASHANA 2025, BENGALURU, DATED: 07.04.2025
(cid:3542)ರತ (cid:3704)(cid:3648)(cid:3467)ನದ ಅ(cid:3485)(cid:3278)(cid:3167) ೕಧ 348ರ (cid:3224)ಡ (3)ರ ಅ(cid:3378)ಯ(cid:3618)(cid:3189) (cid:3587)ಜ(cid:3186) (cid:3497)ಲ(cid:3588)ಂದ
ಅ(cid:3468)(cid:3202)ತ(cid:3236)(cid:3633)(cid:3693)ದ (cid:3377). ಎ(cid:3286). ನರ(cid:3693)ಂಹಯ(cid:3186) (cid:3648)(cid:3302)(cid:3170) ನ, (cid:3670)(cid:3160)(cid:3408)ಕ, (cid:3692)ಂಸ(cid:3161) ೃ(cid:3423)ಕ ಮ(cid:3425)(cid:3176)
ಪ(cid:3187) (cid:3647)(cid:3701)ೕದ(cid:3186) ಮ ಅ(cid:3543)(cid:3652)(cid:3453)(cid:3179) (cid:3497)(cid:3187) (cid:3468)(cid:3197)ರ ಅ(cid:3468)(cid:3483)ಯಮ, 2025 (2025ರ ಕ(cid:3482)(cid:4305)ಟಕ ಅ(cid:3468)(cid:3483)ಯಮ
(cid:3704)(cid:3218)(cid:3186) :32) ರ (cid:3542)(cid:3677)ಂತರವ(cid:3485)(cid:3180) ಅ(cid:3468)(cid:3202)ತ ಆಂಗ(cid:3189) ಪಠ(cid:3186) (cid:3653)ಂ(cid:3455) ಕ(cid:3482)(cid:4305)ಟಕ (cid:3587)ಜ(cid:3186) ಪತ(cid:3187) ದ (cid:3648)(cid:3669)ಷ
(cid:3704)(cid:3273)(cid:3203)ಯ(cid:3618)(cid:3189) ((cid:3542)ಗ-IVಎ) ಪ(cid:3187) ಕ(cid:3348)ಸ(cid:3534)(cid:3203)ಂ(cid:3455) ಆ(cid:3459)(cid:3663)ಸ(cid:3617)(cid:3228)(cid:3458),-
KARNATAKA ACT NO. 32 OF 2025
(First Published in the Karnataka Gazette Extra-ordinary on the 7th day of April, 2025)
Dr. H. NARASIMAIAH SCIENCE, EDUCATIONAL, CULTURAL AND
TOURISM DEVELOPMENT AUTHORITY ACT, 2025
(Received the assent of the Governor on the 5th day of April, 2025)
An Act to provide for the establishment of an Authority for development and
maintenance of the Dr. H. Narasimaiah Science, Educational, Cultural and Tourism
memorial sites in Hosur, Vidurashwatha and around Gouribidanur Taluk, in
Chikkaballapur District.
Whereas, it is expedient to provide for the establishment of an Authority for
development and maintenance of the Dr. H. Narasimaiah Science, Educational, Cultural
and Tourism memorial sites in Hosur, Vidurashwatha and around Gouribidanur Taluk, in
Chikkaballapur into Science, Educational, Cultural and Tourism Center.
Be it enacted by the Karnataka State Legislature in the seventy-sixth year of the
Republic of India as follows; -
CHAPTER –1
PRELIMINARY
1. Short title, extent and commencement.- (1) This Act may be called
Dr. H. Narasimaiah Science, Educational, Cultural and Tourism Development Authority
Act, 2025.
(2) It extends to the area of Hosur, Vidurashwatha and around Gouribidanur Taluk
and other areas as specified in the Schedule.
(3) It shall come into force from such date as the State Government may, by
notification in the official Gazette appoint and different dates may be appointed for different
provisions of this Act.
2. Definitions.- In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,-
(a) “Advisory Committee” means the State Level Advisory Committee constituted
under section 19
(b) 'Amenity' includes roads, streets, sub-ways, lighting, drainage, sanitation,
electricity and water supply or other conveniences, public works, market places,
post offices, banks, hospitals, dispensaries, police stations, fair price shops,
milk booths, libraries, recreation Centres, service stations of any public utility
service authorized by the Authority or other facility; and such other amenity as
the State Government may, by notification specify;
25
(c) ‘Authority' means Dr. H. Narasimaiah Science, Educational, Cultural and
Tourism Development Authority constituted under section 3;
(d) 'Chair-person' means the Chairman of the Authority;
(e) 'Commissioner' means the Commissioner of the Authority appointed under
section 11;
(f) 'Fund' means fund of the Authority;
(g) ‘Memorial site’ means the whole of the area comprising the sites specified in the
Schedule;
(h) 'Member' means a member of the Authority;
(i) 'Regulations' means regulations of the Authority made under section 45; and
(j) ‘Schedule’ means schedule appended to this Act.
CHAPTER – II
AUTHORITY AND ITS EMPLOYEES
3. Dr. H. Narasimaiah Science, Educational, Cultural and Tourism
Development Authority.- (1) As soon as may be, after commencement of this Act, there
shall be constituted for the purposes of this Act an authority called as “Dr. H. Narasimaiah
Science, Educational, Cultural and Tourism Development Authority.”
(2) The Authority shall have its headquarters at Gouribidanur.
(3) The Authority shall be a body corporate by the name aforesaid, having perpetual
succession and a common seal with power to acquire, hold and dispose of property, both
movable and immovable, and enter into contract, and shall by the said name sue and be
sued.
(4) The Authority shall consist of the following members, namely:-
(a) An eminent person who has worked for development
of Science, Educational, Cultural activities in Dr. H.
Narasimaiah Institutions, Memorials, Study Center and Chairman
Kala Bhavan and has wide experience in Administration
and a Graduate or post graduate in Science, nominated by
the Minister of Science and Technology, Government of
Karnataka to be the Chairman of the Authority.
(b) The Deputy Commissioner of the Chikkaballapur Ex-officio Co-
District. Chairman
(c) The Member of State Legislative Assembly Special Invitee
representing Gouribidanur Constituency
(d) The Chief Executive Officer, Chikkaballapur Ex-officio Member
Zilla Panchayat,
(e) The Superintendent of Police, Chikkaballapura Ex-officio Member
District
(f) The Director, Science and Technology Department, Ex-officio Member
Government of Karnataka
(g) The Director of Tourism, Government of Karnataka Ex-officio Member
(h) The Director of Kannada and Culture Department, Ex-officio Member
Government of Karnataka
(i) The Joint Director, Collegiate Education Ex-officio Member
Department, Bengaluru Division.
26
(j) The Deputy Director, School Education and Literacy Ex-officio Member
Department, Chikkaballapur District.
(k) Not exceeding five persons nominated by the State Member
Government, out of whom two persons shall be a prominent
Scientist, Educationist or Cultural Activist.
(l) The Executive Engineer, Public Works Department, Ex-officio Member
Chikkaballapur
(m) The Deputy Conservator of Forests, Chikkaballapur Ex-officio Member
District
(n) The Commissioner of the Authority. Ex-officio Member
Secretary
(o) The President – of the concerned jurisdictional Ex-officio Member
Municipality and Gram Panchayat.
4. Objectives.- An overall objective of the Authority is to develop the
Centres/facilities under the Authority in an integrated and scientific way to provide an
opportunity for learning of science and also for inculcating scientific temper among
students. The Authority shall also strive to inculcate rational thinking among young minds
as advocated by Dr. H. Narasimaiah.
The detailed objectives are as follows:-
(a) popularization of Science and Technology Developments for human welfare;
(b) development of a good educational and resource centre for students and teachers
for enriching their knowledge in one stop destination;
(c) creating an awareness and development of scientific attitude for environment
and promotion of Eco-education thinking among the general public;
(d) protection of culture and heritage;
(e) dissemination of scientific information and better practices for various target
groups;
(f) to identify, encourage and nurture creative scientific talent especially among
children and youth;
(g) to identify priority areas of Science and Technology, which are useful for long
term development of the State;
(h) to organize and/or assist in organizing training courses, workshops, seminars,
conferences, discussions, invited talks, consultancy services and exhibitions;
(i) to supplement science education through hands-on minds-on concept and
through experimentation to foster a spirit of scientific enquiry and creativity among the
students;
(j) to popularize astronomy-based education and related branches such as space
science, technology and innovation among the students and general public through
creating an interesting and stimulating learning situation;
(k) learning science as an enjoyment, creating a positive experience about science,
its history and philosophy along with heritage and culture;
(l) providing a platform for other educational outreach activities including social
studies, art and culture; and
(m) exploration of various components of Authority through the concept of science.
27
5. Term of office and conditions of services.- (1) Subject to the pleasure of the
State Government, the non-official members nominated by the State Government shall
hold office for a period of three years.
(2) Any non-official nominated member may resign his office by writing
addressed to the Chairperson of the Authority but shall continue in his office until
his resignation is accepted by the State Government.
(3) The non-official member shall receive such allowances as may be
prescribed.
6. Disqualification for office of membership.- A person shall be disqualified for
being appointed as and for being a member if he;-
(a) has been convicted and sentenced to imprisonment for an offence which in the
opinion of the State Government involves moral turpitude; or
(b) is of unsound mind and stands so declared by a competent court; or
(c) is an undischarged insolvent; or
(d) has been removed or dismissed from service of the Central Government or a State
Government or a body or corporation owned or controlled by the Central
Government or a State Government; or
(e) has directly or indirectly by himself or as partner, has any share or interest in
any work done by the order of the Authority in any contract or employment with
or under or by or on behalf of the Authority; or
(f) is employed as a paid legal practitioner on behalf of the Authority or accepts
employment as legal practitioner against the Authority:
Provided that, no person shall be disqualified under clause (e) of section 6 or be
deemed to have any share or interest in any contract or employment within the meaning
of the said clause by reason only of his having a share or interest in any newspaper in
which any advertisement relating to the affairs of the Authority is inserted.
7. Removal of member.- The State Government shall remove a member if,
(a) he becomes subject to any of the disqualifications mentioned in section 6:
Provided that, no member shall be removed on the ground that he has become
subject to the disqualification mentioned in clause (e) section 6 unless he has been given
an opportunity of making his representation against the proposal; or
(b) he refuses to act or becomes incapable of acting; or
(c) he without obtaining leave of absence from the Authority absents from three
consecutive meetings of the Authority:
Provided that, this clause shall not be applicable in case of ex-officio members; or
(d) in the opinion of the State Government he has so abused his position as to
render his continuance in office detrimental to the public interest:
Provided that, no member shall be removed under this clause unless he has been
given an opportunity of making his representation against the proposal.
8. Eligibility for reappointment of Member.- Any person ceasing to be a member
shall unless disqualified and removed under section 6, be eligible for re-appointment as a
member.
9. Powers of the Authority.- (1) The Authority shall have power generally to do
anything that in its opinion is necessary to do, to give effect to the intent and provisions of
this Act:
28
Provided that, nothing contained in this section shall be deemed to authorize the
Authority to perform any such act as is specifically laid in the Act to be performed by any
other authority.
(2) Without prejudice to the generality of sub-section (1) the Authority shall have
power;-
(a) to enter into and perform all such contracts as it may consider necessary or
expedient for carrying out any of the purposes of this Act subject to such
conditions as may be prescribed and every contract shall be made on behalf
of the Authority by the Commissioner:
Provided that, no contract involving expenditure of rupees five lakhs and more
shall be made without the previous sanction of the State Government;
(b) to borrow any sum required for the purposes of this Act from time to time with
the previous sanction of the State Government and subject to such conditions
as may be prescribed in this behalf;
(c) to lease, sell or otherwise transfer any movable or immovable property which
belongs to it and to appropriate or apply any land vested in or acquired by it,
subject to section 42 and to such restrictions, conditions and limitations as
may be prescribed, for the formation of open spaces or for building purposes
or in any other manner for the purpose of a development scheme with prior
approval of the State Government.
10. Committees of the Authority.- (1) The Authority may, for any specific
purpose constitute the committees consisting of such number of members including the
Chairperson, but shall not be more than five members including the Chairperson.
(2) The Authority shall nominate the Chairperson of the committee and if required
may appoint outside experts as Chairperson and Members of the committees by virtue of
their expertise.
(3) The Commissioner of the Authority shall be invariably the Member Secretary of
committees.
(4) The committees shall exercise such of the powers and perform such duties of the
Authority, which are delegated by the Authority.
(5) The Committee shall meet as many times as the Chairperson decides and
complete the task given by the Authority within the time limit prescribed.
11. Appointment of Commissioner.- (1) The State Government shall appoint an
officer not below the rank of a K.A.S (Junior Scale) officer or equivalent, to be the
Commissioner of the Authority.
(2) The Commissioner shall receive such salary and other allowances as the
State Government may, from time to time, determine.
(3) The State Government may, from time to time, grant leave of absence for such
period as it thinks fit to the Commissioner.
12. Powers and duties of the Commissioner.- (1) The Commissioner shall be
the Chief Executive and Administrative Officer of the Authority.
(2) The Commissioner shall, in addition to performing such functions as
conferred on him by or under this Act or under any law for the time being in force, -
(a) carry into effect the resolutions of the Authority;
(b) conduct the business of the Authority and keep the correspondence;
29
(c) carry out and execute such schemes and works as the State Government may
direct and incur necessary expenditure therefor;
(d) be responsible for implementing the schemes of the Authority;
(e) operate the Bank accounts of the Authority and be responsible for maintaining
the accounts of the Authority;
(f) exercise supervision and control over the officers and servants of the Authority
in matters of executive, administrative and service conditions of such officers
and employees and regulation of their pay and allowances;
(g) furnish to the State Government a copy of the minutes of the proceedings of
the Authority and any return, or other information which the State
Government may, from time to time, call for; and
(h) discharge such other functions which are conferred on him by or under this
Act or any other law for the time being in force.
13. Employees of the Authority.- (1) Subject to such terms and conditions of
service as may be prescribed, the Authority may appoint such number of employees as it
may find necessary for effective implementation of the Act:
Provided that, the State Government shall appoint a Controller of Finance and
Accounts not below the rank of Group 'A' Junior Scale Officer' on deputation from the
Karnataka State Audit and Accounts Service.
(2) The Controller of Finance and Accounts shall report to the Commissioner and
shall ensure that financial rules are followed; and accounts are kept up to date, presenting
a true and fair picture of the financial affairs of the Authority
(3) The salaries, allowances and other conditions of service of the employees
referred to in sub-section (1), shall be such as may be prescribed.
(4) The Commissioner shall be the appointing authority in respect of employees of
the Authority and shall exercise general control and supervision over the personnel of the
Authority.
14. General disqualification for services under the Authority.- No person who
has, directly or indirectly by himself or through his partner or through his agent, any share
or interest in any contract, by or on behalf of the Authority or in any employment under
the Authority, other than as an officer or employee thereof, shall become or remain an
officer or employee of the Authority.
15. Meetings of the Authority.- (1) Meetings of the Authority shall be convened
by the Commissioner, with the previous approval of the Chairman at such intervals as the
Chairman may deem fit and shall be held at such place, as may be determined by the
Chairman:
Provided that, the Authority shall meet at least thrice in a calendar year.
(2) Every meeting shall be presided over by the Chairman and if for any reason
the Chairman is unable to attend any meeting, the Co-Chairman or any other member
chosen by the members present at the meeting, shall preside over the meeting.
(3) Decisions of the Authority shall be, by unanimous affirmative vote of the
members present and voting. If there is any difference of opinion on any particular subject
coming for decision before the Authority, the Commissioner shall refer the matter to the
State Government and the decision of the State Government in such matters shall be final.
(4) The Commissioner shall give effect to the decisions of the Authority:
Provided that, if in the opinion of the Commissioner any resolution of the Authority
contravenes any provision of this Act or any other law or of any rules, notification or
30
regulations made or issued under this Act or any other law or of any order passed by the
State Government or is prejudicial or detrimental to the interests of the Authority or the
interests of the development and maintenance of Authority, he shall within fifteen days of
the passing of the resolution, refer the matter to the State Government for orders thereon
and inform the Authority at its next meeting, of the action taken by him and until orders
of the State Government on receipt of such reference, the Commissioner shall not be bound
to give effect to such resolution.
(5) The Authority may by regulations specify the procedure with regard to the
transaction of business at its meetings, not inconsistent with the provisions of this Act or
the rules made thereunder.
16. Proceedings presumed to be good and valid.- No disqualification of or
defect in the appointment of any person acting as Chairman or member shall be deemed
to vitiate any act or proceedings of the Authority if such act or proceeding is otherwise in
accordance with the provisions of this Act.
17. Decisions of the Authority by circulation of note.- (1) The Chairman may
direct that any case may, instead of being brought up for discussion at a meeting of the
Authority, be circulated by sending a note in the prescribed form amongst the members of
the Authority for opinion. If all the members unanimously agree for the proposal contained
in the note circulated, it shall be deemed to be affirmative decision of the Authority and
further action taken accordingly. If there is any difference of opinion on any particular
subject taken up for the decision of the Authority by circulation, the Commissioner shall
refer the matter to the State Government, and the decision of the State Government
thereon shall be final.
(2) In cases which are circulated for opinion under sub-section (1), if any
member fails to communicate his opinion to the Commissioner by a date to be specified in
the note, it shall be presumed that such member has accepted the proposal contained in
the note circulated.
(3) The provisions of section 15 shall mutatis mutandis apply to the decisions of
the Authority by circulation under this section.
18. Power of Chairman to take certain decisions.- Where the Chairman is of
the opinion that a matter is so urgent that it cannot wait or that a matter is so frivolous,
not necessitating convening of a meeting of the Authority, under section 15 or for decision
of the Authority by circulation under section 17, he may pass such orders as he may deem
fit and it shall be implemented in the same manner as the decisions of the Authority:
Provided that, every decision so taken by the Chairman under this section shall be
placed before the Authority at its next meeting. The quorum of members shall be minimum
fifty percent for the meeting.
19. State Level Advisory Committee.- (1) There shall be a State Level Advisory
Committee consisting of the following members namely :-
1 The Minister of Science and Technology, Ex-officio
Government of Karnataka President
2 The Minister in charge of Chikkaballapur District Ex-officio
Vice-President
3 The Minister of Tourism, Govt of Karnataka Ex-officio
Vice-President
31
4 The Member of Parliament representing the district Ex-officio Member
of Chikkaballapur
5 The Members of Legislative Assembly, Ex-officio Member
Gauribidanur Constituency
6 The Development Commissioner cum Additional Ex-officio Member
Chief Secretary to Government, Government of
Karnataka
7 The Additional Chief Secretary/ Principal Ex-officio Member
Secretary/ Secretary to Government, Department
of Finance
8 The Additional Chief Secretary/ Principal Secretary Ex-officio Member
to Government, Department of Forest, Ecology and
Environment
9 The Principal Secretary/ Secretary to Government, Ex-officio Member
Department of Information Technology,
Biotechnology and Science and Technology
10 The Additional Chief Secretary/ Principal Secretary Ex-officio Member
to Government, Department of Education (School
Education and Literacy)
11 The Principal Secretary to Government, Ex-officio Member
Department of Tourism
12 The Secretary to Government, Department of Ex-officio Member
Kannada and Culture
13 The Deputy Commissioner, Chikkaballapur District Ex-officio Member
14 An eminent Scientist working at ISRO nominated Ex-officio Member
by Chair person of the ISRO
15 The Director, Indian Institute of Science (IISc), Ex-officio Member
Bengaluru
16 A Director, nomitated by the Chair person of the Ex-officio Member
Science Gallery Bengaluru
17 Three Members who are experts in the field of Non-official
Culture/Science/Technology/Environment/ Members
Heritage and Tourism - to be nominated by the
State Government.
18 The Commissioner, Dr. H. Narasimaiah Science, Ex-officio
Educational, Cultural and Tourism Development Member Secretary
Authority
(2) The Advisory Committee may, if it deems necessary, invite any person who is an
expert in the field of Culture, Science, Technology, Environment, Heritage, Tourism and
other related fields.
(3) The Advisory Committee shall co-ordinate and monitor the activities of the
Authority and advise the Authority on all matters concerning the conservation of the
heritage and history of the area under its jurisdiction as also creating a stimulating
32
environment for learning of science and technology for students and inculcating an
awareness in science and technological developments for the general public, besides the
promotion of tourism within the Authority.
(4) The Commissioner of Authority shall function as Member Secretary of the
Advisory Committee and he shall convene the meeting of the committee at least once in six
months, at such place and at such time and shall adopt such procedure as may be
prescribed.
(5) The Chairperson of the Authority shall present the development plan and place
the Accounts of the previous year and also the budget for the current year before the
Advisory Committee.
(6) The Advisory Committee shall go through the Audited accounts of the last year,
Budget of the Current year and Annual Development Plan of the Project.
(7) The Advisory Committee shall give suggestions in terms of Development of the
Project, Finances, Administration, for which the Authority shall give due importance while
administrating and managing various projects of the Authority.
(8) The decisions of the Advisory Committee shall ordinarily be adopted by the
Authority. If for any reasons, the Authority does not implement suggestions, the Authority
shall come back to Advisory Committee with reasons. If Advisory Committee does not
accept the stated reasons, the matter shall be referred to the Government. The decision of
the Government shall be final in all such cases.
CHAPTER III
DEVELOPMENT AND MAINTENANCE OF AUTHORITY
20. Memorial sites of Authority.- (1) Notwithstanding any custom, tradition,
practice or terms of any trust created and subsisting under any law for the time being in
force, the full control, ownership, management and superintendence of all or any of the
Memorial sites at extent of land at Hosur, Vidurashwatha and around Gouribidanur Taluk,
in Chikkaballapur district specified in the Schedule if not already vested in the State
Government shall be acquired for the public purpose by the State Government in
accordance with the provisions of the Right to Fair Compensation and Transparency in
Land Acquisition, Rehabilitation and Resettlement Act, 2013 (Central Act 30 of 2013) and
such extent of land shall thereafter be transferred to the Authority from the date as notified
by the State Government.
(2) The State Government may by general or special order make transitory provisions,
if in the opinion of the State Government; it is expedient to do so.
21. Power to amend the Schedule.- The State Government may by notification
amend the Schedule by adding or modifying any entry therein, after following such
procedure as may be prescribed.
22. Preparation of development plan, its approval and execution.- (1) The
Authority shall, as soon as may be, after its constitution prepare a plan for the development
of Hosur, Vidurashwatha and around Gouribidanur Taluk, in Chikkaballapur district in
to an international Science, Educational, Cultural, tourism and memorial centre and a
centre for deliberation and the Development plan may include,-
(a) conservation and restoration of any Science, Educational, Cultural, tourism
and memorial site and programs for its maintenance;
(b) proposals for acquiring land by acquisition or purchase, or exchange or
33
otherwise, which in the opinion of the Authority is necessary for execution of
the development plan;
(c) establish Science, Educational, Cultural, tourism and memorial site and
programs in the interest of development for Science, Education, Culture,
Tourism, religious and historical importance of Vidhuraswatha;
(d) construction of necessary chain of shops or shopping complexes;
(e) construction of an auditorium in the style of Veera Soudha at Vidhuraswatha;
(f) upgradation of sub-regional science centre as international science center
located at Hoskote, Gouribidanur Taluk;
(g) provision of amenities as defined in section 2(b);
(h) laying and relaying of all or any land including, construction and
reconstruction of buildings;
(i) providing drainage, electricity and water supply and sanitation;
(j) raising any land which the Authority may consider expedient to raise to
facilitate its plan of action in general and better drainage in particular;
(k) forming open spaces for the better ventilation of the area comprised in the
Hosur, Vidurashwatha or in any adjoining area;
(l) demolition of all buildings unfit for human habitation and not fitting into the
developmental plan;
(m) demolition of obstructive building or portions of buildings;
(n) construction and reconstruction of buildings, their maintenance and
preservation;
(o) the sale, letting or exchange of any property comprised in the scheme, subject
to approved of the State Government;
(p) providing accommodation to the employees of the Authority;
(q) providing facilities for communication and transport;
(r) such adjustments and agreements with the existing religious institutions in
the geographical area of developmental plan which can be allowed to continue
so long as they fit into the scheme of the development plan;
(s) any other matter which in the opinion of the Authority, is expedient and
incidental, to develop and maintain the Hosur, Vidurashwatha and around
Gouribidanur Taluk, in Chikkaballapur District as a Science, Educational,
Cultural, Tourism and memorial centre; and to protect and develop other
places of importance connected with the life of Dr. H. Narasimaiah and for the
establishment of an educational and research centre.
(2) The development plan prepared under sub-section (1) shall be forwarded by
the Commissioner to the State Government for its approval. The State Government may
approve the plan with or without any modifications.
(3) After approval of the development plan under sub-section (2), the State
Government may, on the recommendations of the Authority make such modifications to
the plan as it deems necessary, from time to time.
(4) The Authority shall have power to undertake works and incur expenditure for
the execution of the development plan approved by the State Government under this
section.
23. Maintenance of memorial sites.- The State Government may by rules on
the recommendation of the Authority or otherwise make provision for the maintenance of
34
Memorial Sites which shall include the manner in which the properties of the Authority
including the other sites can be employed, the rates, fees or other charges that can be
collected from the tourists and other visitors to the town for the various facilities that they
could make use of and for such other matters as may be expedient from the premises of
the heritage sites; power to recover rent or damages as arrears of land revenue etc.
24. No other authority or person to undertake development without
permission of the Authority.- (1) Notwithstanding anything contained in any law for the
time being in force, except with the previous permission of the Authority no authority or
person shall undertake any development within the jurisdiction of Memorial Sites as the
Authority may from time to time specify by notification published in the Official Gazette.
(2) No local authority shall grant permission for any development referred to in
sub-section (1), within said sites, unless the Authority has granted permission for such
development.
(3) Any authority or person desiring to undertake development referred to in sub-
section (1) shall apply in writing to the Authority for permission to undertake such
development.
(4) The Authority may, after making such inquiry as it deems necessary grant
such permission with or without conditions, as it may deem fit to impose or refuse to grant
such permission.
(5) Any authority or person aggrieved by the decision of the Authority under sub-
section (4) may, within thirty days from the date of the decision, appeal against such
decision to the State Government, whose decision thereon shall be final:
Provided that, where the aggrieved authority submitting such appeal is under the
administrative control of the Central Government, the appeal shall be decided by the State
Government, after consultation with the Central Government.
(6) In case any person or authority does anything contrary to the decision given
under sub-section (4) as modified in sub-section (5), the Authority shall have power to pull
down, demolish or remove any development undertaken contrary to such decision and
recover the cost of such pulling down, demolition or removal from the person or authority
concerned.
25. Power of entry.- The Authority may authorize any person to enter into or
upon any land or building with or without assistants or workmen for the purposes of,-
(a) making any enquiry, inspection, measurement or survey or taking levels of such
land or building;
(b) examining works under construction and ascertaining the course of sewers and
drains;
(c) digging or boring into the sub-soil;
(d) setting out boundaries and intended lines of work;
(e) making such levels, boundaries and lines by placing marks and cutting
trenches;
(f) ascertaining whether any land is being or has been developed in contravention
of any plan or in contravention of any conditions subject to which such
permission has been granted; or
(g) doing any other thing necessary for the efficient administration of this Act:
Provided that;-
35
(i) no such entry shall be made except between the hours of sunrise and sunset
and without giving reasonable notice to the occupant, or if there be no
occupier, to the owner of the land or building;
(ii) sufficient opportunity shall in every instance be given to enable women or
children, if any, to withdraw from such land or building; and
(iii) due regard shall always be had, so far as may be, compatible with the
exigencies of the purpose for which the entry is made, to the social and
religious usage of the occupant of the land or building entered.
26. Delegation of powers of the State Government to the Authority.-
Notwithstanding anything contained in the any law for the time being in force, the State
Government may by notification delegate any of its powers to be exercisable by it to the
Authority and on the issuance of such notification the Authority shall have such powers
and perform such functions as may be specified in the notification.
27. Duty to maintain streets etc.- Notwithstanding anything contained in the
Karnataka Gram Swaraj and Panchayat Raj Act, 1993 (Karnataka Act 14 of 1993) and the
Karnataka Municipalities Act, 1964(Karnataka Act 22 of 1964), it shall be incumbent on
the Authority to make reasonable and adequate provision by any means or measures which
it is lawfully competent to use or take, for the following matters, namely:
(a) The maintenance, keeping in repair, lighting and cleaning of the streets in
jurisdiction of the Authority; and
(b) The drainage, sanitary arrangement and water supply in respect of the streets
in the jurisdiction of the Authority.
28. Application of Karnataka Act 32 of 1974 to the Authority Premises.- (1)
Subject to the provisions of sub-section (2), the State Government, may by notification
provide from such date as may be specified in the notification that the provisions of the
Karnataka Public Premises (Eviction of Unauthorized Occupants) Act, 1974(Karnataka Act
32 of 1974) shall apply to premises belonging to, vesting in, or leased by, the Authority as
that Act applies in relation to public premises.
(2) On a notification being issued under sub-section (1), the aforesaid Act, and
the rules made thereunder shall apply to the premises of the Authority with the following
modifications, namely:-
(a) The State Government may appoint any officer of the State Government or of
the Authority as it thinks fit, to be the competent officer for the purposes of
the aforesaid Act; and
(b) reference to “Public Premises” in that Act and those rules shall be deemed to
be references to premises of the, Authority and references to “the State
Government” in sections 6,7,8,14, 15, 16 and 17 of that Act shall be deemed
to be references to the Authority.
29. Promotion of science, educational, cultural and tourism by the
Authority.- The Authority may organize programmes and activities for promotion of
Science, Educational, Cultural and Tourism importance-to give wider publicity to the
memorial sites. Such programmes may include;-
(a) celebration Programs for Birth Anniversary of Dr. H Narasimaiah Art
Exhibitions and Sales;
36
(b) conducting Seminars and Exhibitions, workshops relating to works of Dr. H.
Narasimaiah; and
(c) annual exhibition on Education, Science and Technology.
30. Delegation of powers.- (1) The State Government, may by notification,
delegate any of the powers conferred on it by or under this Act, to any other authority,
except the power to make rules under section 43.
(2) The Authority may by regulations, delegate any of the powers conferred on it by
or under this Act to the Commissioner or other officers of the Authority except the power
to make regulations under section 44.
CHAPTER IV
FINANCE and property
31. Fund of the Authority.- (1) There shall be a Fund called the
Dr. H Narasimaih Science, Educational, Cultural and Tourism Development Authority
Fund.
(2) There shall be credited to the said Fund;-
(i) all grants, subventions, donations and gifts made by the Central
Government, State Government, any local authority or anybody, whether
incorporated or not or any person;
(ii) the amount borrowed by the Authority; and
(iii) all other sums received by or on behalf of the Authority from any source
whatsoever.
(3) Except as otherwise directed by the State Government all moneys credited to
the Fund shall be invested in any Scheduled Bank or in the State Government Treasury.
(4) The administrative expenses of the Authority including the salaries,
allowances and pension if any, payable to the Commissioner and other officers and
employees of the Authority shall be defrayed out of the fund of the Authority.
32. Application of the Fund.- The Fund and all property held or vested in the
Authority shall be applied for carrying out the purposes of this Act.
33. Grant by the State Government.-
a. The State Government may every year make a grant to the Authority of
a sum equivalent to the administrative expenses of the Authority, until
the Authority reaches self-maintenance stage out of its own resources.
b. The Authority within five years from its inceptions shall work towards self-
sustainability and from sixth year onwards make an all out efforts top
maintain, run and develop from its own earnings.
c. The Authority may borrow funds from other sources only with the prior
approval of the Government.
34. Budget of the Authority.- (1) The Authority shall prepare every year, before
such date and in such form as may be prescribed, a budget estimate of its income and
expenditure for the financial year and shall forward it to the State Government for
sanction.
37
(2) The Department of Science and Technology, Government of Karnataka shall
be the nodal Department for the Authority on behalf of Government to exercise supervision,
control and to issue directions to the Authority
(3) Expenditure shall be incurred out of the sanctioned budget by the Authority
and as per approved plan. In case of any emergency for expenditures related to other
matters or issues or plans, a special meeting of the authority shall be convened to decide
on the same
(4) The Authority shall not have power to reappropriate funds from one unit of
expenditure to another unit, beyond the permissible limits as stipulated by the
Government. However, prior approval of the State Government is required for any re-
appropriation beyond permissible limit
35. Accounts and audit.- (1) The Commissioner shall cause to be prepare and
maintained such books of accounts, annual statement of accounts and other registers in
such manner as may be prescribed.
(2) The financial year of the Authority shall commence on 1st April of each
calendar year and shall end on 31st March of the succeeding calendar year.
(3) The accounts of the Authority shall be audited annually by the Controller,
State Accounts Department. The Authority or the State Government may order concurrent
and special audits also.
(4) The auditor shall, for the purposes of the audit, have access to all the accounts
and other records of the Authority.
(5) As soon as may be after the receipt of the annual statement of accounts and
the report of the auditor, the Authority shall consider it in its meeting and send a copy of
the annual statement of accounts together with a copy of the report of the auditor to the
State Government, along with its explanation on the comments made by the auditor, if
any, and a statement of action taken by the Authority to remedy the irregularities or
loopholes, if any, pointed out by the auditor.
(6) The State Government may after perusal of the report of the auditor, and other
documents submitted to it, as in sub-section (5), give such directions as it thinks fit to the
Authority and the Authority shall comply with such directions.
36. Reports.- (1) The Authority shall prepare an Annual Report of its working for
each financial year and submit it to the State Government along with other reports under
section 35.
(2) The Authority shall before such date, in such form and at such intervals as may
be prescribed, submit the prescribed reports to the State Government.
CHAPTER-V
MISCELLANEOUS
37. Authority not to sell any land within its jurisdiction.- The Authority shall
not sell any land within its jurisdiction for any purpose and to any person except with the
prior approval of the State Government.
38. Certain persons to be public servants.- All members, officers and servants
of the Authority, shall be deemed, when acting or purporting to act in pursuance of any of
the provisions of this Act to be public servants within the meaning of clause (28) of section
2 of the Bharatiya Nyaya Sanhita, 2023 (Central Act 45 of 2023).
38
39. Protection of action taken under this Act.- No suit, prosecution or other
legal proceeding shall lie against any person for anything which is in good faith done or
purported to be done under this Act.
40. Default in performance of duty.- (1) If the State Government is satisfied
that the Authority has made default in performing any duty imposed on it by or under this
Act, it may fix a period for the performance of that duty.
(2) If in the opinion of the State Government, the Authority fails or neglects to
perform such duty within the period so fixed for its performance, it shall be lawful for the
State Government, notwithstanding anything contained in section 4 to supersede and
reconstitute the Authority in the prescribed manner.
(3) After the supersession of the Authority and until it is reconstituted, the
powers, duties and functions of the Authority under this Act shall be carried on by the
State Government or by such officer or officers, as the State Government may appoint for
this purpose.
41. Dissolution of the Authority.- (1) The State Government may, by
notification, declare that with effect from such date as may be specified in the notification,
the Authority shall be dissolved:
Provided that no such declaration shall be made by the State Government unless,
a resolution to that effect has been moved in and passed by both Houses of the State
Legislature.
(2) With effect from the date specified in the notification under sub-section (1),-
(a) all properties, funds and dues which are vested in and realizable by the
Authority shall vest in and be realizable by the State Government.
(b) all liabilities enforceable against the Authority shall be enforceable
against the State Government to the extent of the properties, funds and
dues vested in and realised by the State Government.
42. Control by the State Government.- (1) The State Government shall have
general administrative control and supervision over all activities and affairs of the
Authority.
(2) The State Government may call for the records of any proceedings of the
Authority, the Commissioner or any officer subordinate to the Authority, for the purpose
of satisfying itself as to the correctness, legality or propriety of such proceedings and may
pass such order with respect thereto as it thinks fit.
43. State Government's powers to give directions.- The State Government
may give such directions to the Authority as in its opinion are necessary or expedient for
carrying out the purpose of this Act and it shall be the duty of the Authority, to comply
with such directions.
44. Power to make rules.- (1) The State Government may, after previous
publication by notification make rules to carry out the purposes of this Act.
(2) Every rule or notification made under this Act shall be laid as soon as may be
after it is made, before each House of the State Legislature while it is in session, for a total
period of thirty days which may be comprised in one session or in two or more successive
sessions and if before the expiry of the session immediately following the session or the
successive sessions aforesaid, both Houses agree in making any modification in the rule
or notification or both Houses agree that the rule or notification should not be made, the
R.N.I. No. KARBIL/2001/47147 POSTAL REGN. No. RNP/KA/BGS/2202/2017-19
Licensed to post without prepayment WPP No. 297
39
rule or notification shall, from the date on which the modification or annulment is notified
have effect only in such modified form or be of no effect as the case may be; so, however,
that any such modification or annulment shall be without, prejudice to the validity of
anything previously done under that rule or notification.
45. Power to make regulations.- The Authority may subject to the provisions of
this Act and the rules made under section 44 and with the previous sanction of the State
Government, by notification make regulations to carry out the purposes of this Act.
46. Removal of difficulties.- (1) If any difficulty arises in giving effect to the
provisions of this Act, the State Government may by notification, make such provisions as
appear to it to be necessary or expedient for removing the difficulty:
Provided that, no such order shall be made under this section after the expiry of the
period of two years from the date of commencement of this Act.
(2) Every order made under sub-section (1) shall be laid, as soon as may be, after it
is made, before each House of the State Legislature.
SCHEDULE
[See clause (I) of section 2 and section 21]
MEMORIAL SITES OF DR. H.NARASIMAIAH SCIENCE, EDUCATIONAL,
CULTURAL AND TOURISM DEVELOPMENT AUTHORITY
(1) Dr. H. Narasimaiah Science Centre, Hosuru,
Gouribidanuru Taluk
(2) Freedom Memorial, Veera Soudha
atVidhuraswatha, Gouribidanuru Taluk
(3) Dr. H. Narasimaiah Memorial at Hosur
(Amaradhama), Gouribidanuru Taluk
(4) Dr. B.R. Ambedkar Study Centre, Gouribidanuru
Taluk
(5) Dr. H. N. Kala Bhavan, Gouribidanuru Taluk
The above translation of (cid:3377). ಎ(cid:3286). ನರ(cid:3693)ಂಹಯ(cid:3186) (cid:3648)(cid:3302)(cid:3170) ನ, (cid:3670)(cid:3160)(cid:3408)ಕ, (cid:3692)ಂಸ(cid:3161) ೃ(cid:3423)ಕ
ಮ(cid:3425)(cid:3176) ಪ(cid:3187) (cid:3647)(cid:3701)ೕದ(cid:3186) ಮ ಅ(cid:3543)(cid:3652)(cid:3453)(cid:3179) (cid:3497)(cid:3187) (cid:3468)(cid:3197)ರ ಅ(cid:3468)(cid:3483)ಯಮ, 2025 (2025 ರ ಕ(cid:3482)(cid:4305)ಟಕ
ಅ(cid:3468)(cid:3483)ಯಮ (cid:3704)(cid:3218)(cid:3186) : 32) be published in the official Gazette under clause (3) of Article
348 of the constitution of India.
THAAWARCHAND GEHLOT
GOVERNOR OF KARANATAKA
By Order and in the name of
the Governor of Karnataka,
G. SRIDHAR
Secretary to Government
Department of Parliamentary
Affairs and Legislation
ಮುದ(cid:206)ಕರು (cid:178)ಾಗೂ ಪ(cid:206)(cid:144)ಾಶಕರು:- ಸಂಕಲ(cid:163)ಾ(cid:297)(cid:144)ಾ(cid:312)ಗಳ(cid:133), ಕ(cid:163)ಾ(cid:143)ಟಕ (cid:170)ಾಜ(cid:205)ಪತ(cid:206), ಸ(cid:144)ಾ(cid:143)(cid:312) (cid:144)ೇಂದ(cid:206) ಮುದ(cid:206)(cid:158)ಾಲಯ, (cid:166)ೆಂಗಳ(cid:136)ರು
THAMMAIAHDDpsKDeAoiN argstRi:ai et N tcal: aN =lA2 lClIu0T yNom2 A s,d 5 i Ksbeg . tA0=e=n 4,r5eK =o.60 da=407 r bdnG0 1 y9a5O8 bt9T Va :02H,k Es18AaRt:4r, 2 M N ed2 5MecM. 5 +tcE.=A50 4NB3I 5 .A2TAd'3 0H 3NO0 = 9G'Fbf 1AeK45LA24OR5fRN3fE54A,0f T4p4Aes8eK35u1Aded,e aco0enn75=yd0Tmd2H8=0A63cMeacfa5aM783fAc0a7I2bA6a5Hc3cf f7ecebe233477492549dfe27d0ada4e8fa340f65c011a4b2055708e9208e2ef520e8, ,2o 9u4=dG4O3VbE8Rf8NbM16EN, T OF
