The Arunachal Pradesh Flood Plain Zoning Act, 2025
Act No. 4 of 2025
DISCLAIMER: This document is being furnished to you for your information by PRS Legislative Research
(PRS). The contents of this document have been obtained from sources PRS believes to be reliable. These
contents have not been independently verified, and PRS makes no representation or warranty as to the accuracy,
completeness or correctness. In some cases the Principal Act and/or Amendment Act may not be available.
Principal Acts may or may not include subsequent amendments. For authoritative text, please contact the relevant
state department concerned or refer to the latest government publication or the gazette notification. Any person
using this material should take their own professional and legal advice before acting on any information contained
in this document. PRS or any persons connected with it do not accept any liability arising from the use of this
document. PRS or any persons connected with it shall not be in any way responsible for any loss, damage, or
distress to any person on account of any action taken or not taken on the basis of this document.
The Arunachal Pradesh Gazette
EXTRAORDINARY
PUBLISHED BY AUTHORITY
No. 116, Vol. XXXII, Naharlagun, Monday, April 7, 2025, Chaitra 17, 1947 (Saka)
GOVERNMENT OF ARUNACHAL PRADESH
LAW, LEGISLATIVE AND JUSTICE DEPARTMENT
CIVIL SECRETARIAT
ITANAGAR
————
NOTIFICATION
The 7th April, 2025
No. Law/Legn-1/2025.—The following Act of the Arunachal Pradesh Legislative Assembly
which was passed in the Fourth Session of the Eighth Legislative Assembly and received the
assent of the Governor of Arunachal Pradesh is hereby published for general information.
(Received the assent of the Governor on 4th April, 2025)
THE ARUNACHAL PRADESH FLOOD PLAIN ZONING ACT, 2025
( Act No. 4 of 2025)
An
Act
to provide for the zoning of flood plains of rivers in the State of Arunachal Pradesh and
matters connected therewith or incidental thereto.
BE it enacted by the Legislative Assembly of Arunachal Pradesh in the Seventy-sixth
year of the Republic of India, as follows : -
CHAPTER - I
Preliminary
1. Short title, extent and commencement : (1) This Act may be called the Arunachal
Pradesh Flood Plain Zoning Act, 2025.
(2) It shall extend to the whole of the State of Arunachal Pradesh.
(3 It shall come into force on the date of its publication in the Official Gazette.
2. Definitions : In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires :
(a) “Flood Plain” means and includes water channel, flood channel and that area of
nearby lowland and which is susceptible to flood by inundation ;
(b) “Flood Plain Zoning” means restricting any human activity in the flood plains of a river
where the plains are created by over flow of water from the channels of rivers and
streams ;
(c) “Flood Zone” means the area which is required to carry the flow of the maximum
probable floods ;
(d) “Flood Zoning Authority” in relation to this Act, means the authority appointed by the
State Government under section 3 ;
(e) “Land” means and includes interest in lands, benefits arising out of lands and things
attached to the earth or permanently fastened to anything attached to the earth;
(f) “Occupier” in respect of any land, means any person who has an interest in the land
and cultivates the land himself or by his servants or by hired labour and includes a
tenant ;
(g) “Owner” in relation to any land includes any person having interest in such land ;
(h) “prescribed” means prescribed by rules made by the State Government under this Act ;
(i) “river” means and includes its tributaries ;
(j) “Water Channel” means the channel in which the flow of a river is generally confined.
2 The Arunachal Pradesh Extraordinary Gazette, April 7, 2025
CHAPTER - II
Flood Zoning Authority and its powers
3. Declaration of flood plain zoning : (1) Where the State Government considers it
necessary or expedient so to do, it may, by notification in the Official Gazette declare
that flood plain zoning shall be made in the manner hereinafter specified ;
(2) The State Government may direct that a survey be made in a river for the purpose of
determining the limits within which the provisions of this Act are to be applied and
that proper charts and registers be prepared specifying all boundaries and landmarks
and any other matter necessary for the purpose of ascertaining such limits.
(3) The State Government may by notification in the Official Gazette appoint the Deputy
Commissioner of the District or such other authority as the Government considers
necessary, as the Flood Zoning Authority for the purposes of making a survey of the
area as required under sub-section (2) and may specify in such notification, the
duties to be discharged by such authority.
4. Powers and functions of the Flood Zoning Authority : The Flood Zoning Authority
shall exercise the powers and discharge the duties in accordance with the provisions of
this Act and the terms and conditions specified in the notification under sub-section (2)
of section 3.
CHAPTER - III
Surveys and Delineation of Flood Plain Area
5. Survey :
(1) The Flood Zoning Authority or any of the authorized officers, shall carry out surveys
of flood plains of the rivers and determine the nature and the extent of flood plains of
the rivers.
(2) The Flood Zoning Authority shall, on the basis of the survey carried out under
sub-section (1) establish flood plain zones and delineate the areas which are subject
to flooding including classification of land with reference to relative risk of flood plain
use intended to safeguard the health, safety and property of the general public.
(3) The Flood Zoning Authority shall prepare charts and registers indicating the areas
delineated under sub-section (2).
6. Power to take up survey : It shall be lawful for the Flood Zoning Authority or any of the
officers authorized on their behalf-
(a) to enter upon and survey and measure levels of any land within their jurisdiction.
(b) to mark such levels, boundaries and lines by placing marks or boundary stones;
(c) to measure the land;
(d) to do all other acts necessary for the purposes of ascertaining the limits referred to
in Section 3 (2); and
(e) Where otherwise the survey cannot be completed and the levels measured, the
authority shall cut down and clear away any part of standing crop, fence or jungle
obstructing the survey :
Provided that no Flood Zoning Authority or any other officers shall enter any building
or open any enclosed court or garden attached to a dwelling-house (unless with the
consent of the occupier thereof) without previously giving such occupier at least seven
days notice in writing of their intention to do so.
CHAPTER - IV
Notification of Limits of Flood Plains
7. Declaration of intention of State Government to demarcate flood plains areas :
The State Government may on the basis of a report from the Flood Zoning Authority or
otherwise, by notification in the Official Gazette, declare its intention to demarcate the
flood plain areas and either prohibit or restrict the use of land therein.
8. Public Notices : (1) The Flood Zoning Authority shall, on the issue of notification under
Section 7, cause public notice of the substance of such notification to be given at
conspicuous places in the area.
(2) The Flood Zoning Authority shall exhibit records, charts, maps, registers and such
other document showing the river channel, flood channel and the flood plain area,
specifying the nature and extent to which the use of limits of the area is either
prohibited or restricted, in the office for inspection by the general public at the timing
specified therein.
(3) The Flood Zoning Authority may also consider to give notices individually to the
owners, occupiers or possessors as the case may be, of the lands situated in the
area, where such information is available in record.
The Arunachal Pradesh Extraordinary Gazette, April 7, 2025 3
9. Objections : (1) Any person, who desires to raise any objection to the limits and either
the prohibitions or restrictions specified in the public notice referred to in Section 8, may
within a period of sixty days from the date of publication of the notification in the Official
Gazette, forward to the Flood Zoning Authority a statement in such manner as may be
prescribed setting forth his objections.
(2) After the expiry of the period aforesaid, the Flood Zoning Authority shall issue a
notice in a manner prescribed and consider the objections after giving the party
concerned a reasonable opportunity of being heard in the matter.
(3) The Flood Zoning Authority shall forward to the State Government its proposals together
with the records referred to in sub-section (3) of Section 8.
10. Decision of State Government : (1) The State Government shall after considering the
report of the Flood Zoning Authority, order such alteration in the limits of the area as it
considers necessary.
(2) The decision of the State Government shall be final.
(3) The State Government shall by notification in the Official Gazette, declare that the
provisions of this Act shall apply to the said river with boundaries and limits as
specified :
Provided that the State Government shall also make arrangement for Rehabilitation
of Colonies already existing in the flood plain.
(4) The areas delineated and approved by the State Government shall be deemed to be
the flood plain and the limits shall, where necessary be marked either by boundary
stones or other suitable marks.
(5) The Flood Zoning Authority shall maintain the charts and registers of such areas so
delineated and such charts and registers shall form part of the permanent records of
the office and published on the online portal.
(6) The charts and registers maintained under sub-section (5) shall be furnished to the
Deputy Commissioner of the District and in which any part of the river is situated and
shall be opened for inspection by the general public at such time as may be prescribed.
CHAPTER - V
Prohibition or Restriction of the use of the Flood Plains
11. Power to prohibit obstruction etc. in flood plain : (1) Where the Flood Zoning Authority
is satisfied that it is necessary to do so in the interest of public health and safety, protection
of property or reducing the inconvenience to the general public, to prohibit or restrict the
activities in the flood plain, the Flood Zoning Authority may, by notification in the Official
Gazette, specify the areas where such prohibition or restriction is to be enforced and the
nature and extent of such prohibition or restriction:
(2) Upon the publication of a notification under sub-section (1), notwithstanding anything
contained in any law, custom, agreement of instrument, for the time being in force,
the prohibition or restriction specified in such notification shall prevail.
(3) No person shall undertake any activity within the prohibited area or restricted area
except with the previous permission of Flood Zoning Authority.
12. Penalty : If any person commences or carries on or attempts to carry on any activity in
the areas specified in the notification under sub-section (1) of Section 11 contrary to the
terms and conditions specified in such notifications, he or she shall be punishable;
(a) with fine, which may extend to one lakh rupees and in default of payment of fine, with
simple imprisonment for a term which may extend to two months; and
(b) with further fine which may extend to five thousand rupees for each day during which
the offence continues after the conviction under clause (a).
13. Power to Compound : (1) Subject to such conditions as may be prescribed, any officer
authorized by the State Government by a general or special order in this behalf may,
either before or after the institution of proceedings under this Act, accept from the person
who has committed or is reasonably suspected of having committed an offence, a sum of
money not exceeding one lakh rupees.
(2) On the payment of such sum of money along with an undertaking, to the effect that
same offence shall not be repeated, such person shall be discharged, and no further
proceedings shall be taken against him in respect of such offence.
4 The Arunachal Pradesh Extraordinary Gazette, April 7, 2025
14. Appeal : (1) Any person aggrieved by any decision of the Flood Zoning Authority may
prefer an appeal to an authority prescribed by the State Government in this behalf, within
a period of ninety days from the date on which such decision was communicated to him:
Provided that the appellate authority may entertain the appeal after the expiry of the
said period of ninety days, if he or she is satisfied that the appellant was prevented by
sufficient cause from filing the appeal in time.
(2) The appellate authority may, after giving a reasonable opportunity to the appellant
of being heard, pass such orders as he or she thinks fit and the decision thereof
shall be final.
15. Revision : (1) Where no appeal has been preferred under Section 14, the State Government
may, for the purpose of examining the legality or propriety or correctness of any order,
inquiry or proceedings of the Flood Zoning Authority, call for the records of any enquiry or
proceedings of the Flood Zoning Authority and make such order in the case as it thinks fit :
Provided that no such record shall be called after the expiry of six months from
the date of such order.
(2) No order of the Flood Zoning Authority shall be varied by the State Government so
as to pre-judicially affect any person without giving such person a reasonable
opportunity of being heard in person in the matter.
CHAPTER - VI
Compensation
16. Payment of compensation : (1) Subject to restrictions specified in Section 18, where
any permission to undertake any activity in the flood plain has been refused to any
person or where as a result of prohibition or restriction imposed on any person under this
Act, such person suffers any damage, he shall be entitled to the payment of compensation
of the value of the land as may be determined under the Right to Fair Compensation
and Transparency in Land Acquisition, Rehabilitation and Resettlement Act, 2013
(Act No. 30 of 2013).
(2) In determining the amount of compensation under sub-section (1) any restriction to
which the land is subjected to under any other law for the time being in force in
regard to the right of the person claiming compensation to carry on any activity on
the land or otherwise to the use of the land shall be taken into consideration for
payment of compensation.
17. Determining the compensation and apportionment by consent : (1) The person to
whom the compensation under Section 16 is to be paid and the apportionment of such
amount among the persons interested therein shall be determined by agreement between
the Flood Zoning Authority and the person or persons claiming interest therein.
(2) In default of any such agreement, the Flood Zoning Authority shall, after holding
such enquiry as it considers necessary, make an award determining :
(a) the amount of compensation to be paid under Section 16 ; and
(b) the apportionment, if any, of such compensation among persons known or
believed to be interested therein ;
Provided that where the amount of compensation exceeds one lakh fifty thousand
rupees, no award shall be made without the previous approval of the State Government
or such other officer as the State Government may authorized in this behalf.
18. Compensation not admissible : (1) No compensation shall be awarded-
(a) if and in so far as the land is subject to substantially similar restriction in force under
some other law in force on the date on which the restrictions were imposed by or
under this Act ; or
(b) if compensation in respect of the same restrictions were imposed by or under this
Act or substantially similar restrictions in force under some other law has already
been paid in respect of the land to the claimant or any predecessor in interest of the
claim; or
(c) for removal of any encroachment.
(d) to a person not having right to carry any activity on the said land or otherwise use
the land.
(2) Whosoever undertakes an unauthorized activity, then any increase in the land value
from such activity shall not be taken into account in estimating the value of land.
The Arunachal Pradesh Extraordinary Gazette, April 7, 2025 5
19. Application against award : (1) Any person aggrieved by the award of the Flood Zoning
Authority under sub-section(2) of Section 16 may, by an application in writing, apply to
the competent civil court of the district for settlement in terms of Section 64 of Right to
Fair Compensation and Transparency in Land Acquisition, Rehabilitation and Resettlement
Act, 2013 (Act No. 30 of 2013).
(2) Any application under sub-section (1) shall be made in such form and in such manner
as may be prescribed and shall be made within forty five days from the date of
communication of the award.
(3) The application under this section shall be disposed of in such manner as may be
prescribed.
20. Payment under award : On the determination of the compensation under sub-section
(1) of Section 17, or on the making of an award under sub-section (2) of Section 17 or, if
an application is made under Section 19 against such award, after decision of the Flood
Zoning authority, the compensation shall be paid by Flood Zoning Authority and the
provisions of the Right to Fair Compensation and Transparency in Land Acquisition,
Rehabilitation and Resettlement Act, 2013 (Act No. 30 of 2013) shall apply to such payment.
CHAPTER - VII
Power to Remove Obstructions after Prohibition
21. Power to remove obstructions : (1) The Flood zoning Authority may, in accordance
with the provisions of this Act, direct any owner or occupier of land to do any act or to
remove any un-authorized obstructions within such time as may be specified by it and
such owner or occupier shall do such act or remove the obstructions.
(2) If owner or occupier fails to comply with the order of the Flood Zoning Authority within
the time specified under sub-section (1), the Flood Zoning Authority may cause the
act to be performed or cause the obstructions to be removed.
(3) All expenses incurred by the Flood Zoning Authority under this section shall be
recovered from such owner or occupier as arrears of land revenue as Public Demands
under Bengal Public Demands Recovery Act, 1913.
CHAPTER - VIII
Miscellaneous
22. Preventing Flood Zoning Authority from discharging any act to be an offence :
Any person who prevents the Flood Zoning Authority in discharging any act imposed
on such Authority by or under this Act, shall be deemed to have committed an offence
under Section 186 of the Section 221 of Bharatiya Nyaya Sanhita, 2023 (Act No. 45 of
2023) or any other law for the time being in force.
23. Flood zoning Authority other officers to be public servants : The Flood zoning
Authority and other officers and employees authorized under this Act shall be deemed to
be public servants within the meaning of sub-section (28) of Section 2 of the Bharatiya
Nyaya Sanhita, 2023 (Act No. 45 of 2023).
24. Protection of action taken in good faith : (1) No suit, prosecution or other legal
proceeding shall lie against the State Government or any authority or person exercising
any power or performing any duty under this Act for anything which is in good faith done
or intended to be done in pursuance of this Act or an order made thereunder.
(2) No suit, or other legal proceeding shall lie against the State Government for any
damage caused or likely to be caused for anything which is in good faith done or
intended to be done in pursuance of this Act or any rule or order made thereunder.
25. Recovery of fine : All fines imposed under this Act shall be recovered in the manner
provided in the Bharatiya Nagarik Suraksha Sanhita, 2023 (Act No. 46 of 2023).
26. Power of Court : A Civil Court of competent jurisdiction shall have jurisdiction to settle,
decide or deal with any dispute which is by or under this Act required to be settled,
decided or deal with by the Flood Zoning Authority or such other officer as is authorized
by the State Government in this behalf.
27. Power to make rules : (1) The State Government may, by notification in the Official
Gazette make rules to carry out the purposes of this Act.
(2) In particular and without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing provisions, such
rules may provide for -
(a) the manner in which charts and records shall be maintained;
(b) the form and manner in which application under Section 19 shall be made and
the manner in which such application shall be disposed of; and
(c) any such matters which has to be, or may be, prescribed.
6 The Arunachal Pradesh Extraordinary Gazette, April 7, 2025
(3) Every rule made under this Act shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is made,
before the House of the State Legislature while it is in session for a total period of 14
days which may be comprised in one session or two or successive sessions and if
before the expiry of the session immediately following the session or the successive
session aforesaid the House agrees in making any modification in the rule, or the
House agrees that the rule should not be made, the rule shall, thereafter, have effect
only in such modified form or be of no effect, as the case may be, so, however, that
any such modification or annulment shall be without prejudice to the validity of anything
previously done under that rule.
28. Power to remove difficulty : If any difficulty arises in giving effect to the provisions of
this Act, the State Government may, by order do anything not inconsistent with the
provisions of this Act, which appears to it necessary for removing the difficulty.
29. Repeal and saving : The Arunachal Pradesh Flood Plain Zoning Ordinance, 2024 is
hereby repealed.
Notwithstanding such repeal, any order issued or action taken under the said
ordinance shall be deemed to have been validly taken under the corresponding sections
of this Act.
Yashpal Garg, IAS
Commissioner to the
Government of Arunachal Pradesh,
Itanagar.
————
Published and printed by Directorate of Printing & Stationery Naharlagun.—208/2025-DoP-250+Secy. (LA)-
50+Commissioner (Law)-50+Secy. (WRD)-50-4-2025.
