The Haryana Abadi Deh (Vesting, Recording and Resolving of Ownership Rights)
Act, 2025
Act No. 4 of 2026
DISCLAIMER: This document is being furnished to you for your information by PRS Legislative Research
(PRS). The contents of this document have been obtained from sources PRS believes to be reliable. These
contents have not been independently verified, and PRS makes no representation or warranty as to the accuracy,
completeness or correctness. In some cases the Principal Act and/or Amendment Act may not be available.
Principal Acts may or may not include subsequent amendments. For authoritative text, please contact the relevant
state department concerned or refer to the latest government publication or the gazette notification. Any person
using this material should take their own professional and legal advice before acting on any information contained
in this document. PRS or any persons connected with it do not accept any liability arising from the use of this
document. PRS or any persons connected with it shall not be in any way responsible for any loss, damage, or
distress to any person on account of any action taken or not taken on the basis of this document.
HARYANA GOVT. GAZ. (EXTRA.), JAN. 19, 2026 (PAUS. 29, 1947 SAKA) 17
PART-I
HARYANA GOVERNMENT
LAW AND LEGISLATIVE DEPARTMENT
Notification
The 19th January, 2026
No. Leg. 4/2026.— The following Act of the Legislature of the State of Haryana received
the assent of the Governor of Haryana on the 12th January, 2026 and is hereby published for
general information:-
HARYANA ACT NO. 4 OF 2026
THE HARYANA ABADI DEH (VESTING, RECORDING AND RESOLVING OF
OWNERSHIP RIGHTS) ACT, 2025
AN
ACT
to provide for vesting, recording and resolving of ownership rights within the abadi deh
area of a revenue estate in the occupier and the matters connected therewith or incidental thereto;
WHEREAS, the rights in the land both possessory and proprietary were crystallized
through a process called settlement of land holdings which is embodied in the Punjab Settlement
Manual and eventually lead to enactment of the Haryana Land Revenue Act, 1887 (Punjab Act
XVII of 1887). The record of rights of the private agricultural land were prepared by recognizing
the permanent right of an individual to occupy the land leading to creation of proprietary right in
the land, or in other words called as ownership, besides keeping apart the common land for
common use called as “shamilat deh”, the possessory and proprietary rights of which also vested
in the proprietors subject to the village administration paper known as “Sharat Wazib-ul-arz”;
WHEREAS, the agricultural land in the revenue estate was demarcated into khewats,
khatonis and khasra numbers and was made amenable to assessment of land revenue, however, the
inhabited area of the village together with the small plots attached in which cattle were penned,
manure was stored and straw was stacked and other waste land attached to the village site was
measured in one number, and single khewat, khatoni and khasra number was allotted to such area
called as “abadi deh”. The said area was not assessed to land revenue;
WHEREAS, the Haryana Village Common Lands (Regulation) Act, 1961 (Punjab Act 18
of 1961) was enacted to consolidate and amend the law regulating the rights in shamilat deh and
abadi deh. By virtue of vesting provision as embodied in clause (b) of sub-section (1) of section 4
of the said Act, all rights, title and interests whatever in the land which was situated within or
outside the abadi deh of a village and which was under the house owned by a non-proprietor, were
deemed to have been vested in such non-proprietor, on the commencement of shamilat law;
WHEREAS, despite vesting provided under the Haryana Village Common Lands
(Regulation) Act, 1961 (Punjab Act 18 of 1961), the common rule of ownership within abadi deh
remained and followed even today is that ownership follows possession, however, neither there
has been an acknowledgement of such ownership over the land in abadi deh nor a valid
corresponding legal document has ever been prepared which shall validate and recognize an
individual as an owner of the land in abadi deh, occupied by such an individual permanently. As a
result of which, the household in abadi deh have been deprived of recognized ownership rights
over the land vested and occupied by them permanently;
WHEREAS, the abadi deh area in the State of Haryana has remained without
recording of rights of the proprietors, preparation of record or the marking of boundaries by
carrying out a survey. The right holder enjoy the use and occupation of the land/property during
their lifetime and on death, the rights including possession pass on to the successor-in-interest(s),
however, great hardship is caused in transferring of rights, i.e. ownership, lease, will, mortgage
etc. in the absence of recorded rights. This has over the years resulted in disputes about
demarcation of boundaries and identification of rights in the dwelling and other areas; besides
causing hardship in the effective transfer of rights;
18 HARYANA GOVT. GAZ. (EXTRA.), JAN. 19, 2026 (PAUS. 29, 1947 SAKA)
WHEREAS, considering it necessary to endow the proprietary rights on the occupier in the
abadi deh, a Memorandum of Understanding (MoU) was signed on the 8th March, 2019 between the
Survey of India (SoI) and the State Government for survey, and updating of survey and settlement
rewards. Thereafter, a pilot project was launched in the village Sirsi (Karnal) on the 24th April, 2020
wherein survey was conducted for mapping the area for the purposes of preparing record of rights.
Thereafter, survey of villages abadi and mapping with improvised technology in village areas,
shortly known as SVAMITVA scheme, was initiated as a reformative step towards establishment of
clear ownership of property in rural inhabited abadi areas, by mapping of land parcels using drone
technology and providing ‘Record of Rights’ to village household owners with issuance of legal
ownership card i.e. SVAMITVA Rights Certificate/Property Identification Right Certificate/
Certificate/ Deed of Title/Ownership to the property owner(s). Under the said scheme, drone
mapping was carried out extensively in several villages of State of Haryana by Survey of India for
demarcating the land within abadi deh area and title deeds were executed and property cards were
issued declaring the individuals as owners of the land occupied by them in the abadi deh areas;
WHEREAS, amendment in Haryana Land Records Manual was carried out vide notification
No CFMS-824-R-2022/3185, dated the 1st April, 2022 by adding a new Chapter 7A titled as
“The Record of Rights-Abadi Deh” for prescribing a procedure for identifying and preparing the
record of rights and resolving the existing rights of the occupier within the abadi deh by a process of
ascertaining the person entitled to be recorded as owner, on best effort basis;
WHEREAS, it has been felt expedient to provide a statutory recognition to the entire process
carried out and sought to be carried out in future for preparation of record of rights in abadi deh areas
in the State of Haryana and thus this Act. The object of this Act is to identify, record and resolve the
existing rights of the occupiers within the abadi deh by a process of ascertaining the person(s) best
entitled to be recorded as owner and vesting the ownership rights in such person(s); besides,
demarcating, delineating the boundaries and areas of each survey unit and to create a presumption of
truth in the records so prepared, though rebuttable;
WHEREAS, considering that despite providing of vesting of the land having house
constructed thereupon within the abadi deh area in the proprietor and non-proprietor in the Haryana
Village Common Lands (Regulation) Act, 1961 (Punjab Act 18 of 1961) due to lack in preparation
of corresponding record of such vesting and subsequent changes, it is deemed necessary to provide
for a cut-off date for ascertaining the person(s) best entitled to be recorded as owner(s) which was
initiated by way of Memorandum of Understanding signed on the 8th March, 2019 between the
Survey of India and the State Government and further by way of SVAMITVA scheme and since the
Memorandum of Understanding was signed on the 8th March, 2019 between Survey of India and the
State Government, the said date is being considered as appointed cut-off date for the purposes of this
Act;
And whereas, the preparation of record shall provide for development of the abadi deh that
preserves the heritage of the village to the extent possible, provide and upgrade civic services and
environment in villages to integrate them with planned urban development, levying any cess/ tax for
community development, enhance the land value by improving the lay out and provide a road map or
development norms for villages in an easy and simple manner and further for facilitating the
occupier for monetizing the property by taking financial assistance etc.
Be it enacted by the Legislature of the State of Haryana in the Seventy-sixth Year of the
Republic of India as follows:-
Short title, 1. (1) This Act may be called the Haryana Abadi Deh (Vesting, Recording and Resolving
extent, of Ownership Rights) Act, 2025.
application and
commencement. (2) It extends to the whole of the State of Haryana.
(3) It shall apply on abadi deh areas falling outside municipal limits:
Provided that if process of recording of rights is commenced under this Act or had
commenced from the appointed day, the same shall be concluded or deemed to have been
concluded under this Act, even if before such conclusion, the area comes within municipal limits.
(4) It shall be deemed to have come into force with effect from the 26th November, 2025.
HARYANA GOVT. GAZ. (EXTRA.), JAN. 19, 2026 (PAUS. 29, 1947 SAKA) 19
2. (1) In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires, - Definitions.
(a) “abadi deh” means the site recorded as such in the Record of Rights
prepared and maintained under the Haryana Land Revenue Act, 1887
(Punjab Act XVII of 1887), which is not assessed to land revenue;
(b) “appointed day” for the purposes of this Act shall be the 08th March, 2019
i.e. the day on which Memorandum of Understanding was signed between
the Survey of India and the State Government;
(c) “Assistant Collector 1st Grade” means and includes an officer as notified
under the Haryana Land Revenue Act, 1887 (Punjab Act XVII of 1887) to
perform the functions of Assistant Collector 1st Grade;
(d) “Assistant Collector 2nd Grade” means and includes an officer as notified
under the Haryana Land Revenue Act, 1887 (Punjab Act XVII of 1887) to
perform the functions of Assistant Collector 2nd Grade;
(e) “Collector” means and includes an officer as notified under the Haryana
Land Revenue Act, 1887 (Punjab Act XVII of 1887) to perform the
functions of Collector;
(f) “Commissioner” means the Commissioner of the Division notified as such
under the Haryana Land Revenue Act, 1887 (Punjab Act XVII of 1887);
(g) “common area” means an area but not limited to an area or building within
the abadi deh used for any common need, convenience or benefit of the
community and shall include roads, paths, streets, public parks, drains,
public toilets, ponds, tanks, wells, water courses, playgrounds, bus stands or
waiting places, places used for public sittings and gatherings or for any such
other purpose used by the inhabitants and any vacant site or plot in abadi
deh which is vested in Panchayat under shamilat laws but does not include a
building or area which houses an establishment/office/ institution under the
control of the Central Government or the State Government;
(h) “courtyard” means an open space in and around the dwelling and residential
area enclosed either by boundary wall, fencing, in form of barbed wire or
any other means;
(i) “Financial Commissioner” means the Financial Commissioner, Revenue
notified as such to perform the functions under the Haryana Land Revenue
Act, 1887 (Punjab Act XVII of 1887);
(j) “Government” means the Government of the State of Haryana in the
administrative department;
(k) “occupier” means a person(s) who is in permanent possession of a built-up
structure including dwelling and residential area along with its courtyard,
shop and establishment, having rights akin to an owner, and is not in
possession as a tenant, lessee, mortgagee, assignee or such other possession
which is temporary in nature;
(l) “owner” means an occupier whose name is recorded in the final record of
rights prepared under this Act;
(m) “ownership right” means the right of ownership recorded in the name of a
person, Panchayat, Central Government or State Government, juristic person
or any other entity but does not include the rights of a tenant, lessee,
mortgagee or any other right which does not confer ownership;
(n) “Panchayat” means a Gram Panchayat constituted under the Haryana
Panchayati Raj Act, 1994 (11 of 1994);
(o) “prescribed” means prescribed by rules made under this Act;
(p) “Revenue Officer” means and includes an officer as notified under the
Haryana Land Revenue Act, 1887 (Punjab Act XVII of 1887) to perform
the functions of Revenue Officer;
(q) “Schedule” means the Schedule appended to this Act;
(r) “State Government” means the Government of the State of Haryana;
20 HARYANA GOVT. GAZ. (EXTRA.), JAN. 19, 2026 (PAUS. 29, 1947 SAKA)
(s) “survey agency” means and include Survey of India or any other agency
designated by the Government to act and perform functions under this Act;
(t) “Survey Officer” means an officer appointed by the Government to act and
perform functions under this Act;
(u) “survey number” means the unique number assigned to each survey unit in
the prescribed manner;
(v) “survey unit” means the area within the abadi deh, to which a survey number
is assigned under this Act;
(w) “SVAMITVA scheme” means the Survey of Villages Abadi and Mapping
with Improvised Technology in Village Areas Scheme for establishment of
clear ownership of property in rural inhabitated abadi area.
(2) Words and expressions used in this Act but not defined herein shall have the same
meaning as assigned to them in the Haryana Land Revenue Act, 1887 (Punjab Act XVII of 1887).
Vesting of 3. (1) Notwithstanding anything to the contrary contained in any other State law for the
rights with time being in force including clause (b) of sub-section (1) of section 4 of the Haryana Village
occupier.
Common Lands (Regulation) Act, 1961 (Punjab Act 18 of 1961), all rights, title and interests
whatever in the land including ownership, which is situated within the abadi deh of a village
whereupon a built-up structure in the form of dwelling and residential unit along with its courtyard,
vacant land, plot, shop and establishment exist, shall be deemed to have been vested in the occupier
of such land on the appointed day:
Provided that such vesting shall however be subject to the procedure laid down under this
Act as regards preparation of standing record of rights:
Provided further that such land in abadi deh which was vested in the Panchayat as per clause
(a) of sub-section (1) of section 4 of the Haryana Village Common Lands (Regulation) Act, 1961
(Punjab Act 18 of 1961) shall continue to remain vested in the Panchayat and shall not vest in the
occupier as on the appointed day, except in the cases wherein possession is acknowledged,
authorized or admitted in accordance with the provisions of the Haryana Village Common Lands
(Regulation) Act, 1961 (Punjab Act 18 of 1961), in which eventuality, the land shall vest in such
occupier, in accordance with the provisions of this Act.
(2) Nothing in this Act shall affect validity and enforcement of the Haryana Village
Common Lands (Regulation) Act, 1961 (Punjab Act 18 of 1961) with regard to the land within the
abadi deh which was vacant and vested in the Panchayat under clause (a) of sub-section (1) of
section 4 of the Haryana Village Common Lands (Regulation) Act, 1961 (Punjab Act 18 of 1961).
Officers. 4. (1) The following officers shall perform the functions and exercise powers under this
Act, namely: -
(a) Financial Commissioner;
(b) Commissioner;
(c) Collector;
(d) Assistant Collector 1st Grade;
(e) Assistant Collector 2nd Grade; and
(f) Survey Officer.
(2) Subject to the provisions of this Act, the officers shall have, for the purposes of
discharging their functions under this Act, the same powers as are vested in a civil Court under the
Code of Civil Procedure, 1908 (Central Act 5 of 1908), in respect of the following matters,
namely:-
(i) the summoning and enforcing of attendance of any person and examining
him;
(ii) requiring the discovery and production of documents;
(iii) receiving evidence on affidavit;
(iv) subject to the relevant provisions of the Bharatiya Sakshya Adhiniyam, 2023
(Central Act 47 of 2023), requisitioning any public record or document or
copy of such record or document from any office; and
(v) issuing commission(s) for the examination of witnesses or documents.
HARYANA GOVT. GAZ. (EXTRA.), JAN. 19, 2026 (PAUS. 29, 1947 SAKA) 21
5. (1) The superintendence and control over all officers in their administrative functioning Superintendence
under this Act shall vest in the Financial Commissioner. and control of
officers.
(2) Subject to the superintendence and control of the Financial Commissioner, the
Commissioner of the division shall have control over all officers within his division.
(3) Subject as aforesaid and to the control of the Commissioner, the Collector shall
have control over all the officers within his district.
6. (1) The Government may, by notification, appoint one or more Survey Officer(s) for Survey and
abadi deh area(s) in a Tehsil to conduct a survey for the purposes of this Act. mapping.
(2) The Government may itself or through an agency get a survey conducted and
mapping done or may consider the survey from the appointed day and as conducted under the
SVAMITVA scheme of such area to determine the boundary of the abadi deh, define the area and
dimension of each survey unit and assign a unique survey number to each such unit.
(3) Field book shall be prepared for each survey unit in the manner and format as
provided in Schedule-I, giving therein the details as regards the dimension, area, type and user of
survey unit and such other details, which shall be recorded in such manner, as may be prescribed.
(4) The survey report and map prepared of the area shall be submitted to the Assistant
Collector 2nd Grade for the purpose of preparing the standing record of rights in the survey units.
(5) A map prepared under sub-section (2) along with the field book shall form part of
record of rights and shall have the feature of permanency so far as record of rights is concerned
along with the statement showing nature and extent of interest of the persons who are
occupier(s)/tenant(s)/lessees/assignee(s) in the survey unit.
(6) Notwithstanding anything contained in this Act, the survey and mapping done by an
agency of the Central Government or the State Government for identifying the boundary of an
abadi deh and demarcating the units within the abadi deh in accordance with the instructions,
directions or orders issued by the Government from time to time, before the commencement of
this Act, shall be deemed to have been done under this Act and shall be considered as a valid and
legal document for all intents and purposes under this Act.
7. The Survey Officer or any person authorized by the Government to act as such may enter, Power to enter.
when necessary for the purpose of measurement, demarcation, fixation or inspection of
boundaries or boundary marks, or for any other purpose connected with the lawful exercise of his
office under the provisions of this Act, upon any land or premises, whether belonging to
Government or to private individual:
Provided that no premises used as human dwelling shall be entered upon, except with the
consent of the occupier thereof or without serving on the occupier a notice of not less than three
days in the manner, as may be prescribed and in case of refusal to receive, by affixing a copy of
such notice on the unit:
Provided further that due regard shall always be paid to the social and religious prejudices
of the occupier.
8. There shall be a standing record of rights for each abadi deh area, which may comprise of Standing record
the following, namely: - of rights.
(i) statement showing-
(a) the persons who are owners, tenants, lessees or assignees of land within
abadi deh in the village or who are entitled to receive any of the rent, profit
and to occupy land therein;
(b) the nature and extent of the interests of those persons and the conditions and
liabilities attaching thereto;
(c) the rent, rate, cess or other payments due from and to each of those persons
and to the Government; or
(ii) the record of ownership rights of each survey unit; or
(iii) the survey reports and maps prepared; or
(iv) Property Identification Right Certificate/ Svamitva Rights Certificate/Certificate/
Deed of Title/Ownership; or
(v) genealogical or pedigree table of the owner; or
(vi) the record of proceedings of the meetings of the village committee; or
(vii) such other document, as may be prescribed.
22 HARYANA GOVT. GAZ. (EXTRA.), JAN. 19, 2026 (PAUS. 29, 1947 SAKA)
Inquiry by 9. (1) The Assistant Collector 2nd Grade shall constitute a village committee comprising of
Assistant the following for identifying the ownership rights of the occupiers in the survey unit, namely:-
Collector 2nd
Grade. (a) the Sarpanch of the Panchayat;
(b) the Lambardar of the village of which standing records of right is to be
prepared;
(c) one-woman Panch of the Panchayat, if any or one-woman nominated by
Gram Sabha;
(d) one Panch belonging to Scheduled Castes/ Backward Class;
(e) any other member, as may be specified by the Government.
(2) The Assistant Collector 2nd Grade, in respect of the abadi deh of which the standing
record of rights is to be prepared, shall inform the inhabitants of the area about the proposal of
such record for each of the survey unit, in the manner, as may be prescribed.
Preparation of 10. (1) The Assistant Collector 2nd Grade, after due deliberation and consultation with the
draft standing village committee shall in summary manner, as may be prescribed, record the proposed entries of
record of rights.
owners, their ownership rights of the boundaries of the survey unit in the standing record of rights
as per Schedule-II, as on the appointed day.
(2) The entry of owner and his ownership rights shall be recorded by the Assistant
Collector 2nd Grade in the name of -
(i) the occupier of a built-up structure including dwelling and residential area
along with its courtyard, vacant land, plot, shop and establishment:
Provided that in the case of co-occupier, ownership rights shall be recorded in
their respective share, unless the share is expressly relinquished or released in favour
of the occupier to be recorded in the manner, as may be prescribed;
(ii) the panchayat for the common area and such land which is vested in the
Panchayat as per clause (a) of sub-section (1) of section 4 of the Haryana
Village Common Lands (Regulation) Act, 1961 (Punjab Act 18 of 1961),
except in cases wherein possession is acknowledged, authorized or admitted
in accordance with the provisions of the Haryana Village Common Lands
(Regulation) Act, 1961 (Punjab Act 18 of 1961);
(iii) the Central Government or State Government or juristic person or other entity
in respect of the land or institutions owned by it:
Provided that the Assistant Collector 2nd Grade while making the aforesaid
entry shall take into consideration any change on account of inheritance, transfer,
gift etc., which might have taken place in between the appointed day and preparation
of record of rights.
(3) In the preparation of record of rights under sub-sections (1) and (2), if a survey unit is
found to be sub-divided, which escaped the attention of the Survey Officer at the time of survey,
the Assistant Collector 2nd Grade shall assign a unique number to each such survey unit.
Display of 11. The survey map prepared under section 6 with demarcation, boundary and area of the survey
record. unit as per Schedule-II, shall for the purposes of inviting objections be displayed on the website to
be specified by the Government, at a conspicuous place in the village such as Panchayat ghar,
village co-operative society, patwar khana, dharamshala, community centre, gram sachivalya,
citizen service centre or common religious places and a copy thereof shall be supplied to the
Panchayat through the Sarpanch of the village, in such manner, as may be prescribed.
Raising of 12. (1) Any person aggrieved by the demarcation of any boundary in the survey record or an
objections and entry regarding the ownership rights in the draft standing record of rights in a survey unit, may
decisions
within ninety days from the date of display of record in the manner as provided in section 11, file
thereof.
objections about the correctness thereof before the Assistant Collector 2nd Grade as per
Schedule-III:
Provided that the Assistant Collector 2nd Grade may entertain objection(s) after the
expiry of such period if it is satisfied that there was sufficient cause for not filing the objections
within that period.
HARYANA GOVT. GAZ. (EXTRA.), JAN. 19, 2026 (PAUS. 29, 1947 SAKA) 23
(2) The Assistant Collector 2nd Grade after hearing the parties and perusing the record,
if any, shall make necessary correction of the boundaries in the survey map and ascertain the best
entitled occupier to be recorded as the owner of the survey unit and pass an order in this regard by
recording reasons within a period of ninety days from the date, the parties interested puts in
appearance or is proceeded against ex-parte.
(3) Any correction or amendment made in the area, boundary or dimension of a survey
unit while passing an order be incorporated by the Assistant Collector 2nd Grade in red ink in the
field book.
(4) The Assistant Collector 2nd Grade may take into consideration such relevant and
material document or writing prepared in course of documentation, for the purposes of this Act.
13. (1) In case no objection is filed within the period provided under sub-section (1) of Preparation of
section 12 for any entry recorded under section 10, the same shall be treated as final and shall be final standing
record of rights.
recorded as such in the final record of rights in the format provided in Schedule-IV.
(2) In case of any objection recorded under sub-section (1) of section 12, the entry in
record of rights shall be made in accordance with the decision taken under sub-section (2) of
section 12, after the expiry of period of thirty days from the date of such decision.
(3) The standing record of rights finalized by the Assistant Collector 2nd Grade shall be
amended or modified in accordance with the decision in appeal, review or revision, as the case
may be.
(4) The Assistant Collector 2nd Grade shall issue a SVAMITVA Rights Certificate/
Property Identification Right Certificate/Certificate/Deed of Title/Ownership to the occupier,
whose name is recorded in the final record of rights in such form, as may be prescribed, unless
rebutted.
(5) Notwithstanding anything contained in this Act, the certificate issued by any
authority acting under the directions of the Government or any other department of the State
Government on appointed day, shall be deemed to have been issued under this Act.
(6) Any person aggrieved with the entry as recorded, shall have the right to invoke the
provisions of appeal, review and revision, as the case may be, provided under this Act and the
limitation period for such cases shall commence from the date of commencement of this Act.
14. (1) Any person aggrieved by an order passed by the Assistant Collector 2nd Grade Appeal.
under section 12 may, within thirty days of the passing of such order, file an appeal before the
Assistant Collector 1st Grade:
Provided that the Assistant Collector 1st Grade may entertain an appeal after the
expiry of the such period if it is satisfied that there was sufficient cause for not filing it within that
period.
(2) The Assistant Collector 1st Grade after hearing the parties interested and likely to
be affected either accept the appeal or dismiss the same by passing a reasoned order.
(3) Any person aggrieved by an order passed by the Assistant Collector 1st Grade
under sub-section (2) may, within thirty days of the passing of such order, further appeal to the
Collector, who shall after hearing the parties interested and likely to be affected either accept the
appeal or dismiss the same by passing a reasoned order.
(4) Appeals filed under sub-sections (2) and (3) shall be decided by the Assistant
Collector 1st Grade and the Collector, as the case may be, within sixty days from the date the
respondent puts in appearance or is proceeded against ex-parte unless for reasons to be recorded in
writing or it is directed otherwise.
(5) An appellate authority shall not remand a case except where it is established from
the record that an adverse order has been passed against a necessary party who was not duly
served.
15. The Assistant Collector 2nd Grade, the Assistant Collector 1st Grade and the Collector Review.
may, within sixty days of the order sought to be reviewed either on their own motion or on the
application of a party interested, after notice to the party likely to be affected and after giving
reasonable opportunity of hearing, review and on so reviewing, modify, reverse or confirm any
order passed by him:
24 HARYANA GOVT. GAZ. (EXTRA.), JAN. 19, 2026 (PAUS. 29, 1947 SAKA)
Provided that-
(i) when an Assistant Collector 2nd Grade finds it necessary to review any order, he
shall first obtain the sanction of the Assistant Collector 1st Grade;
(ii) when an Assistant Collector 1st Grade finds it necessary to review any order, he
shall first obtain the sanction of the Collector;
(iii) when a Collector finds it necessary to review any order, he shall first obtain the
sanction of the Commissioner;
(iv) when any such order is modified or reversed on review by the Assistant Collector
2nd Grade or the Assistant Collector 1st Grade, an appeal shall lie against the order
of the Assistant Collector 2nd Grade to the Assistant Collector 1st Grade and from
the order of the Assistant Collector 1st Grade to the Collector and the order on such
appeal shall be final;
(v) an order against which an appeal or revision has been preferred shall not be
reviewed; and
(vi) an appeal shall not lie from an order refusing or granting permission to review or
confirming on review a previous order.
Revision by 16. The Commissioner may, on an application of an aggrieved party within sixty days of an
Commissioner. order being passed, or on its own motion, call for and examine the records relating to any order
passed or proceedings taken under this Act for the purpose of satisfying himself as to the legality
or propriety of such order or proceedings and after hearing the affected parties, may pass such order
in relation thereto as he may deem fit or modify or reverse or confirm any order passed under this
Act.
Transfer of 17. (1) After preparation and finalization of the standing record of rights of the abadi deh
record to the area, the Assistant Collector 2nd Grade shall attest and transfer the same to the District Collector
District
concerned, which shall be consigned to the district office.
Collector.
(2) One set of the standing record of rights as prepared shall be maintained with the
concerned Patwari. The mutations thereafter shall be recorded based on the standing record of
rights as per Schedule-V.
Application of 18. The provisions of Chapter IV of the Haryana Land Revenue Act, 1887 (Punjab Act XVII of
Chapter IV of 1887) after transfer of the record under section 17 of this Act shall apply mutatis mutandis to such
Punjab Act
record.
XVII of 1887.
Consensual 19. In case where all the co-owners have reached to the consensus about the partition of the
partition of survey units situated within the abadi deh, the Assistant Collector 2nd Grade shall finalize the
survey units.
record of rights by passing an order:
Provided that the Assistant Collector 2nd Grade after examining such co- owners of the
survey unit and other persons, may, if he is of the opinion that survey unit is impartible or the
partition is impractical, and there is good and sufficient cause to disallow the partition, may refuse
partition of the survey unit after recording the grounds of his refusal, by passing a speaking order.
Dispute as to 20. In case of dispute, an application for the partition of a survey unit shall lie before the
partition. Assistant Collector 2nd Grade in such manner, as may be prescribed. The Assistant Collector 2nd
Grade shall issue notice to all the co-owners as mentioned in the final record of rights of the survey
units and shall proceed to adjudicate in the manner and within such period, as may be prescribed.
Appeal in case 21. (1) Any person aggrieved by an order passed by the Assistant Collector 2nd Grade
of partition. under section 20 may, within thirty days of the passing of such order, file an appeal before the
Assistant Collector 1st Grade:
Provided that the Assistant Collector 1st Grade may entertain an appeal after the
expiry of the such period if it is satisfied that there was sufficient cause for not filing it within that
period.
(2) The Assistant Collector 1st Grade after hearing the parties interested and likely to be
affected either accept the appeal or dismiss the same by passing a reasoned order.
(3) Any person aggrieved by an order passed by the Assistant Collector 1st Grade under
sub-section (2) may, within thirty days of the passing of such order, further appeal to the Collector,
who shall after hearing the parties interested and likely to be affected either accept the appeal or
dismiss the same by passing a reasoned order.
HARYANA GOVT. GAZ. (EXTRA.), JAN. 19, 2026 (PAUS. 29, 1947 SAKA) 25
(4) Appeals filed under sub-sections (2) and (3) shall be decided by the Assistant
Collector 1st Grade and the Collector, as the case may be, within sixty days from the date the
respondent puts in appearance or is proceeded against ex-parte unless for reasons to be recorded in
writing or it is directed otherwise.
(5) An appellate authority shall not remand a case except where it is established from
the record that an adverse order has been passed against a necessary party who was not duly
served.
22. (1) A summon issued by an officer appointed under this Act shall be served- Summoning.
(i) personally, on the person to whom it is addressed;
(ii) his recognized agent; or
(iii) an adult member of his family usually residing with him.
(2) A summon may be served by pasting a copy thereof at the usual or last known
place of residence of the person to whom it is addressed.
(3) A summon may, if an officer appointed under this Act so directs, be served on the
person named therein, either in addition to, or in substitution for, any other mode of service, by
forwarding the summons by post in a letter addressed to the person and registered under Chapter
VI of the Indian Post Office Act, 1898 (Central Act VI of 1898), or sent through a reputed courier
agency notified by the Government in this regard.
(4) When a summon is so forwarded in the form of a letter, and it is proved that the
letter was properly addressed and duly posted and registered, the officer appointed under this Act
may presume that the summon was served at the time when receipt of its delivery is furnished:
Provided that in case of a letter sent through registered post, its delivery may be presumed after
thirty days in case it is not received back undelivered within such period.
(5) A summon may be served on the person named therein by publication of the
contents thereof in a daily Hindi newspaper having vide circulation in the area:
Provided that if the summon relates to a case in which persons having the same
interest are so numerous that personal service on all of them is not reasonably practicable, it may,
in the first instance and if the officer appointed under this Act so directs, be served by delivery of
a copy thereof to such of those persons as the officer appointed under this Act nominates in this
behalf, and by publication of the contents thereof in a daily Hindi newspaper having wide
circulation in the area, for the information of the other persons interested.
(6) The summon may be served through Short Message Service or email or through
any other electronic mode at the phone number or e-mail address otherwise known or made
known to the officer appointed under this Act:
Provided that if service is effected through any of the above modes, a printout of the delivery of
summons shall be placed on the record.
(7) Any notice, order of proclamation or copy of any such document issued by an
officer under this Act for service on any person shall be served in the same manner as provided in
this section for the service of a summons.
(8) In case of service of summons through any of the modes referred to in above
sub-sections, a printout of the delivery of summons shall be placed on the record, which shall be
substantive proof of service of summons.
23. Any entry made in a standing record of rights in accordance with the provisions of this Act Presumption in
shall be presumed to be true until the contrary is proved or a new entry is lawfully substituted favour of entries
in standing record
thereof.
of rights.
24. No civil Court shall have any jurisdiction to entertain or decide any question relating to Bar of
matters falling under this Act. jurisdiction.
25. The clerical or arithmetical mistakes in any order passed by any officer under this Act Correction of
may, at any time be corrected by the authority concerned either on its own motion or on the clerical errors.
application of any of the parties and an intimation of such correction shall be made to the parties
free of charges and also to the concerned officer for its implementation.
26 HARYANA GOVT. GAZ. (EXTRA.), JAN. 19, 2026 (PAUS. 29, 1947 SAKA)
Protection of 26. No suit, prosecution or other legal proceeding shall lie against any officer under this Act or
action taken in any official acting under the directions of such officer, for anything which is in good faith done or
good faith.
intended to be done under the provisions of this Act or any rules made thereunder.
Power to 27. (1) If any difficulty arises in giving effect to the provisions of this Act, the Government
remove may, by order published in the Official Gazette, make such provisions, not inconsistent with the
difficulties.
provisions of this Act as appear to it to be necessary or expedient for removing the difficulty:
Provided that no such order shall be made after the expiry of a period of two years
from the date of commencement of this Act.
(2) Every order made under this section shall, as soon as may be, after it is made, be laid
before the State Legislature.
Power to enter 28. The officer under this Act may, in the discharge of his official duty, enter upon and survey
premises. land, put and erect survey marks thereon and demarcate the boundaries thereof and do all such acts
necessary for carrying out the provisions of this Act, in such manner, as may be prescribed.
Fine and 29. (1) If any person willfully destroys, dismantles or without lawful authority removes a
reward. survey or demarcation mark lawfully erected or put, the Assistant Collector 1st Grade shall impose
a fine not exceeding one thousand rupees for each mark so destroyed, dismantled or removed, as
may, in the opinion of such officer be necessary to defray the expenses of restoring the same and
rewarding the person, if any, who gave information of the destruction, dismantling or removal.
(2) The amount of fine levied under sub-section (1), if not paid in the manner as
prescribed, shall be recoverable as the arrears of land revenue.
Power to make 30. (1) The Government may, by notification, in the Official Gazette, make rules for
rules. carrying out the purposes of this Act.
(2) Every rule made under this Act shall be laid as soon as may be after it is made,
before the State Legislature.
Savings. 31. Anything done or any action taken by the Government from the appointed day, under the
SVAMITVA scheme, Chapter 7A of Haryana Land Records Manual and the orders issued by the
Government from time to time in relation to the purposes of this Act shall be deemed to have been
done or taken under this Act.
Repeal and 32. (1) The Haryana Abadi Deh (Vesting, Recording and Resolving of Ownership Rights)
savings. Ordinance, 2025 (Haryana Ordinance No. 6 of 2025), is hereby repealed.
(2) Notwithstanding such repeal, anything done or any action taken under the said
Ordinance shall be deemed to have been done or taken under this Act.
HARYANA GOVT. GAZ. (EXTRA.), JAN. 19, 2026 (PAUS. 29, 1947 SAKA) 27
Schedule – I
[see section 6(3)]
Record-of Rights – Abadi Deh (lal dora)
(Field Book)
Revenue Estate _________________, H.B. No. _________ (Abadi Deh), Tehsil _______________,
District ________________.
1 2 3 4 5 6 7
Sr. Name of Survey Dimensions in Total Area Type of Remarks / Corrections
No. Locality, unit Meter & in Sq. Property.* and amendments, if
wherever Number Centimeter/ meters & any, made to columns 2
identifiable Yard, Feet and Sq. Yards. to 6 in appeals, revision
Inch etc. to be recorded in
red ink.
Boundaries
East:
West:
South:
North:
Field Kanungo Patwari
*Type – whether house, shop, institution, common area, path etc.
Note : The survey of the abadi deh depicting the number of the survey unit shall be submitted with this Schedule.
Assistant Collector 2nd Grade
28 HARYANA GOVT. GAZ. (EXTRA.), JAN. 19, 2026 (PAUS. 29, 1947 SAKA)
Schedule – II
[see section 10(1)]
Record-of-Rights – Abadi Deh
(Draft record of entries of owner in a survey unit)
Name of the Village ________, Revenue Estate __________, H.B. No. ______, Tehsil ______, District __________.
Financial Year:
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8
Sr. No. of Name of Name of Survey Dimensions Area in Type of Remarks
proprietorship Locality, owner unit in Meters & Sq. Property.
wherever (Panchayat No. Centimeter/ meters
identifiable & Govt. Yard, Feet & Sq.
and its and inch Yards.
entities / Boundaries
private East:
owner West:
with father South:
& grand- North:
father’s or
husband &
husband’s
father’s
name and
extent of
share of
each, if
there are
more than
one co-
sharer in a
survey unit
Field Kanungo Patwari
Assistant Collector 2nd Grade
HARYANA GOVT. GAZ. (EXTRA.), JAN. 19, 2026 (PAUS. 29, 1947 SAKA) 29
Schedule – III
[see section 12(1)]
Record-of-Rights – Abadi Deh
(Objections with regard to Survey units)
Name of the Village ______________________, Revenue Estate ______________, H.B. No. _________________,
Tehsil _____________, District ________________.
To
The Revenue Officer
Tehsil ______, District ______.
Subject: - Objections with regard to survey Unit No. ______.
Sir/Madam,
The applicant submits the following objection(s) in relation to (tick one):-
(i) Dimension, measurement, boundary or area;
(ii) Ownership / Proprietary rights; or
(iii) Both the above.
(iv) Any other objection.
Brief description of the objection(s):
Place: (Signature of the applicant/objector)
Date: Name (with ID Proof):
Father’s & Grandfather’s or Husband’s &
Husband’s father Name:
Complete Address:
Note: In case of Panchayat and Government and its entities, the objection shall be filed by them in this form as well.
30 HARYANA GOVT. GAZ. (EXTRA.), JAN. 19, 2026 (PAUS. 29, 1947 SAKA)
Schedule – IV
[see section 13(1)]
Record of Rights – Abadi Deh
(Final record of rights of the survey units)
Name of the Village ____________, Revenue Estate __________, H.B. No. _________, Tehsil ____________,
District ____________.
Financial Year:
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8
Sr. No. of Name of Name of owner Survey Dimensions Area Type of Remarks
proprietorship Locality, (Panchayat and unit No. in Meter & in Sq. Property.
wherever Government centimeter/ meters
identifiable and its entities / Yard, Feet & Sq.
private owner and Inch Yards.
with father &
grand-father’s Boundaries
or husband & East:
husband’s West:
father’s name South:
and extent of North:
share of each, if
there are more
than one co-
sharer in a
survey unit
It is certified that all necessary corrections have been made and entries in the record of rights are complete and correct
in all respects.
Patwari Field Kanungo
Assistant Collector 2nd Grade/Assistant Collector 1st Grade
Place:
Date:
HARYANA GOVT. GAZ. (EXTRA.), JAN. 19, 2026 (PAUS. 29, 1947 SAKA) 31
Schedule-V
[see section 17(2)]
Records of Rights – Abadi Deh
(Register of Mutations)
Revenue Estate _________________, H.B. No. _________ (Abadi Deh), Tehsil _______________,
District ________________.
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12
Entry in last jamabandi abadi New entry which is proposed
deh, which is proposed to be to substitute
corrected.
Sr. No. of Owner’s Survey Area and No. of Owner’s Survey Area and Nature Mutation Reports
No. holding as name, unit type ( in holding in name, Unit type ( in and date fee and
in last father’s No. Meter & new father’s No. Meter & of orders.
jamabandi name, centimeters jamabandi name, centimeters transfer,
abadi deh grand- / Yard / abadi deh grand- / Yard / with
father’s Foot & father’s Foot & price in
name / inch) name / inch) case of
husband’s husband’s sale and
name, name, amount
husband’s husband’s of
father’s father’s mortgage
name, name, debt in
extent of extent of case of
share share mortgage
RITU GARG,
ADMINISTRATIVE SECRETARY TO GOVERNMENT, HARYANA,
LAW AND LEGISLATIVE DEPARTMENT.
12369—L.R.—H.G.P., Pkl.
