The Arunachal Pradesh Arun Parivar Patra Authority Act, 2025
Act No. 6 of 2025
DISCLAIMER: This document is being furnished to you for your information by PRS Legislative Research
(PRS). The contents of this document have been obtained from sources PRS believes to be reliable. These
contents have not been independently verified, and PRS makes no representation or warranty as to the accuracy,
completeness or correctness. In some cases the Principal Act and/or Amendment Act may not be available.
Principal Acts may or may not include subsequent amendments. For authoritative text, please contact the relevant
state department concerned or refer to the latest government publication or the gazette notification. Any person
using this material should take their own professional and legal advice before acting on any information contained
in this document. PRS or any persons connected with it do not accept any liability arising from the use of this
document. PRS or any persons connected with it shall not be in any way responsible for any loss, damage, or
distress to any person on account of any action taken or not taken on the basis of this document.
The Arunachal Pradesh Gazette
EXTRAORDINARY
PUBLISHED BY AUTHORITY
No. 115, Vol. XXXII, Naharlagun, Monday, April 7, 2025, Chaitra 17, 1947 (Saka)
GOVERNMENT OF ARUNACHAL PRADESH
LAW, LEGISLATIVE AND JUSTICE DEPARTMENT
CIVIL SECRETARIAT
ITANAGAR
—————
NOTIFICATION
The 7th April, 2025
No. Law/Legn-3/2025.—The following Act of the Arunachal Pradesh Legislative Assembly
which was passed in the Fourth Session of the Eighth Legislative Assembly and received the
assent of the Governor of Arunachal Pradesh is hereby published for general information.
(Received the assent of the Governor on 4th April, 2025)
THE ARUNACHAL PRADESH ARUN PARIVAR PATRA
AUTHORITY ACT, 2025
(Act No. 6 of 2025)
An
Act
to provide for, as a measure for good governance, efficient, transparent and targeted
delivery of public welfare benefits and services to the individual residing in the State of Arunachal
Pradesh, the expenditure for which is incurred from the Consolidated Fund of the State, using
Arun Parivar Patra ID as identifier; constitution of Arunachal Pradesh Arun Parivar Patra
Authority and for matters connected therewith or incidental thereto.
Be it enacted by the Arunachal Pradesh State Legislature in the Seventy-Sixth Year of
the Republic of India, as follows:
CHAPTER - I
Preliminary
1. Short title, extent and commencement :
(1) This Act may be called the Arunachal Pradesh Arun Parivar Patra Authority Act, 2025.
(2) It shall extend to the whole of the State of Arunachal Pradesh.
(3) It shall come into force on the date of its publication in the Official Gazette.
2. Definitions :
(1) In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires :
(a) “Aadhaar number” means an identification number issued to an individual under
sub-section(3) of Section 3 of the Aadhaar (Targeted Delivery of Financial and
other Subsidies, Benefits and Services) Act, 2016 (Central Act No. 18 of 2016);
(b) “Authentication” means the process by which the Aadhaar number along with
demographic information and biometric information of an individual is submitted to
the Arun Parivar Patra Resident Data Repository for its verification and such
Repository verifies the correctness, or the lack thereof, on the basis of information
available with it;
(c) “Authority” means the Arunachal Pradesh Arun Parivar Patra Authority established
and constituted under Section19;
(d) “Biometric information” means photograph, finger print, iris scan, or such other
biological attributes of an individual specified by the Central Government;
(e) “Central Act” means the Aadhaar (Targeted Delivery of Financial and other
Subsidies, Benefits and Services) Act, 2016 (Central Act No.18 of 2016) ;
(f) “Demographic information” includes information relating to the name, date of birth,
address, tribe, records of entitlement, income, medical history, and other relevant
information of an individual.
(g) “Enrolment” means enrolment of a family under Section 6 of this Act;
(h) “family” means a group of members related to each other by blood, marriage or
adoption and normally residing together and sharing meals;
2 The Arunachal Pradesh Extraordinary Gazette, April 7, 2025
(i) “Fund” means the Fund of the Authority established under Section 28;
(j) “Government body” means anybody owned, controlled or substantially finance by
the State Government.
(k) “Head of the family” means a woman member of the family of the age of eighteen
years or above, declared by the family members in the prescribed manner as
head of the family:
Provided that in case a family has no woman member of the age of eighteen years
or above at the time of enrolment, any male member of the family of the age of
twenty one years or above may be declared to be the head of the family till an
eligible woman member of the family takes his place; or in case a family has no
male member of the age of twenty one years or above at the time of enrolment,
any eldest member of the family of any gender, may be declared as head of the
family by the family members. If such head of the family is a male, he can remain
so only till an eligible woman member of the family takes his place;
(l) “Identity information” in respect of a member of a family includes his Aadhaar number
and his demographic information;
(m) “Arun Parivar Patra ID” means a unique Arun Parivar Patra ID, for identifying a
family issued, under Section 6;
(n) “Arun Parivar Patra Platform” means an electronic mechanism of interface between
the resident and the Government department or Government body created under
the provisions of this Act;
(o) “Arun Parivar Patra Resident Data Repository” means the Arun Parivar Patra
Resident Data Repository created under Section 9 of this Act;
(p) “Prescribed” means prescribed by rules made under this Act;
(q) “Public welfare benefits” means any advantage, gift, reward, relief, aid, subsidy or
any payment, whether in cash or kind, provided by the State Government directly
or through a Government body to an individual or a family and includes such other
benefits as may be notified by the State Government from time to time;
(r) “Records of entitlement” means records of public welfare benefits and services
under any programme or scheme for which any family or any of its members is
entitled to;
(s) “Registrar” means any entity authorised or recognized by the Authority for the
purpose of enrolment under this Act;
(t) “Regulations” means the regulations made by the Authority under this Act;
(u) “Requesting entity” means a Government Department or a Government body
that submits the Arun Parivar Patra ID, identity information and photograph
(if required) to the Arun Parivar Patra Resident Data Repository for authentication;
(v) “Resident”, with all its grammatical variations, means a resident who has resided
in a local area of Arunachal Pradesh for the past six months or more or a person
who intends to reside in that area for the next six months or more;
(w) “Rules” means the rules made by the State Government under this Act;
(x) “Service” means any provision, facility, utility or any other assistance provided in
any form to a family or an individual and includes such other services as may be
notified by the State Government from time to time;
(y) “Verification” means the process of verifying the correctness of the identity
information submitted by the Head of the Family or any adult member at the time
of enrolment.
(2)Words and expressions used in this Act but not defined herein above shall have the
same meanings as respectively assigned to them under the Central Act.
CHAPTER - II
Authentication
3. Authentication and Proof of Aadhaar and/or Arun Parivar Patra necessary for
receipt of Public Welfare Benefits and services: The State Government may, for the
purpose of establishing identity of an individual as a condition for receipt of public welfare
benefits and services for which the expenditure is incurred from the Consolidated Fund of
the State, require that such individual undergo authentication, or furnish proof of possession
of Aadhaar number and/or Arun Parivar Patra ID or in the case of an individual to whom no
Aadhaar number and no Arun Parivar Patra ID has been assigned, such individual makes
an application for enrolment:
Provided that till such time an Aadhaar number and/or Arun Parivar Patra ID is not assigned
to an individual, the individual shall be offered alternate and viable means of identification
for delivery of public welfare benefits and services.
The Arunachal Pradesh Extraordinary Gazette, April 7, 2025 3
4. Notifying schemes by the State Government: The State Government shall, from time
to time, notify public welfare benefits and services for which such authentication or proof
is required as per Section 3.
5. Application of Chapter III of Central Act: The provisions of Chapter III of the Central Act
shall mutatis mutandis apply to authentication under this Act.
CHAPTER-III
Arun Parivar Patra Card
6. Enrolment for Arun Parivar Patra Card:
(1) Every resident family of the State shall be entitled, through its head or through any
eldest or adult member, to obtain Arun Parivar Patra Card by submitting identity
information and photograph of all its members in the prescribed manner.
(2) On receipt of the identity information and photograph of the members of the family
under sub-section(1), the Authority shall, after verifying the information in such
manner, as may be prescribed, enroll the family and assign to the family a unique
Arun Parivar Patra ID which shall be a unique random number.
7. Salient features of Arun Parivar Patra ID :
(1) An Arun Parivar Patra ID assigned to a family shall be a unique number and it shall
not be re-assigned to any other family.
(2) An Arun Parivar Patra ID shall be a random number and bear no relation to the attributes
or identity of the Arun Parivar Patra ID holder.
(3) An Arun Parivar Patra ID, in physical or electronic form subject to authentication and
other conditions, a may be prescribed, shall be accepted as proof of identity and
proof of address of the family members for the purpose of public welfare benefits and
services and may also be accepted as proof of identity and proof of address for any
other purpose.
Explanation : For the purposes of this sub-section, the expression “electronic form”
shall have the same meaning as assigned to it I clause (r) of sub-section (1)
of Section 2 of the Information Technology Act, 2000 (Central Act No.21of 2000).
8. Arun Parivar Patra Card:
(1) On enrolment under Section 6, the Authority shall issue to the head of the family a
Arun Parivar Patra Card in such form and in such manner, on payment of such fees,
if any, as may be prescribed.
(2) If any member of the family so desires by an application made in this behalf, he/she
may also be issued an individual Arun Parivar Patra card in such form and in such
manner, on payment of such fees, if any, as may be prescribed.
CHAPTER - IV
Arun Parivar Patra Resident Data Repository and Protection of Information
9. Creation of Arun Parivar Patra Resident Data Repository :
(1) The Authority shall create and maintain a data base of identity information and
photograph of all the Arun Parivar Patra card holders as the Arun Parivar Patra Resident
Data Repository in such manner as may be prescribed
(2) The Authority may engage any agency, as it may deem appropriate, to create and
maintain the Arun Parivar Patra Resident Data Repository and to perform any other
functions relating to the Arun Parivar Patra Resident Data Repository as may be
prescribed.
10. Security and confidentiality of information:
(1) The Authority shall ensure the security and confidentiality of the data in Arun Parivar
Patra Resident Data Repository.
(2) Without prejudice to the generality of sub-section (1), the Authority shall-
(a) adopt and implement appropriate technical and organisational security measures;
(b) ensure that the agencies, consultants, advisors or other persons appointed
or engaged for performing any function of the Authority under this Act, have in
place appropriate technical and organizational security measures for the
information; and
(c) ensure that the agreements or arrangements entered into with such agencies,
consultants, advisors or other persons, impose obligations equivalent to those
imposed on the Authority under this Act, and require such agencies, consultants,
advisors or other persons to act only on instructions from the Authority.
4 The Arunachal Pradesh Extraordinary Gazette, April 7, 2025
(3) Save as otherwise provided in this Act, the Authority or any of its officers or other
employees or any agency that maintains the Arun Parivar Patra Resident Data
Repository shall not, whether during his service or thereafter, reveal any information
stored in the Arun Parivar Patra Resident Data Repository or authentication record to
anyone except in accordance with any law for the time being inforce:
Provided that any information of Arun Parivar Patra card holder stored in the Arun
Parivar Patra Resident Data Repository may be revealed to such holder on a request
made by him in the manner specified in regulations.
(4) The provisions of Chapter VI of the Central Act shall mutatis mutandis apply to
Protection of Information under this Act.
11. Restriction on sharing information :
(1) No identity information and photograph of Arun Parivar Patra card holder collected
under this Act and Arun Parivar Patra ID shall be shared with anyone, for any reason
whatsoever, except in accordance with the provisions of this Act.
(2) Arun Parivar Patra ID,identity information and photograph shall not be published,
displayed or posted publicly, except for such purposes, as may be prescribed.
(3) Arun Parivar Patra ID,identity information and photograph may be used by the
Government for identifying beneficiaries for welfare schemes and disseminating
information in case of natural calamities/disasters in accordance with the provisions
of this Act.
12. Sharing of information by a requesting entity:
(1) Identity information and photograph available with a requesting entity:
(a) shall not be used by the requesting entity for any purpose other than that specified
for the Arun Parivar Patra ID holder at the time of submitting the request for
authentication of identity information; and
(b) shall not be disclosed further without the prior consent of the Arun Parivar Patra
ID holder.
(2) A requesting entity may share the authentication logs of a Arun Parivar Patra ID
holder with the Arun Parivar Patra ID holder concerned upon request of the family.
13. Alteration of identity information and photograph:
(1) In case any identity information and photograph of a member of the Arun Parivar
Patra card holder family is found incorrect or changes subsequently, the head of the
family or any other adult member of the family may request the Authority to alter
such identity information or photograph, as the case may be, in the record of the
family in the Arun Parivar Patra Resident Data Repository in such manner, as may
be prescribed.
(2) The Authority may, suo motu or on receipt of any request under sub-section (1), after
such inquiry or/ and verification as it may deem fit, make such alteration as may be
required in the Arun Parivar Patra Resident Data Repository, and intimate such
alteration to the head of the family and the member concerned in the manner as may
be prescribed.
(3) No identity information and photograph in the Arun Parivar Patra Resident Data
Repository shall be altered except in the manner provided in this Act.
CHAPTER-V
Delivery of Services and direct transfer of benefits
14. Delivery of Services:
(1) The State Government may, for the purpose of establishing identity of a family or any
of its members, as a condition for receipt of public welfare benefits and services,
notify the list of the services under Section 7 of the Central Act to be delivered through
Arun Parivar Patra Platform.
(2) The Authority shall endeavour to deliver public welfare benefits and services to the
beneficiaries at their doorsteps or at the places nearby to their residences through
Common Service Centres (CSC) network or through such other means, as it may
deem fit.
(3) The Administration, control and management of the CSC network shall vest in the
Authority.
15. Direct transfer of benefit to the beneficiary: The State Government may, by notification,
specify that any public welfare benefit, whenever such benefits are in the nature of cash
shall, after authentication, be transferred directly to the bank account of the beneficiary,
and in case the public welfare benefits pertain to a family, to the bank account of the head
of the family, in such manner, as may be prescribed.
The Arunachal Pradesh Extraordinary Gazette, April 7, 2025 5
16. Use of Arun Parivar Patra Resident Data Repository for service delivery :
(1) The State Government, through Government department or Government body shall
deliver all public welfare benefits and services as notified under Section 4 and
Section 14 ,after authentication, through the Arun Parivar Patra Platform.
(2) Every department shall seed its departmental data base of a family or any of its
members pertaining to public welfare benefits notified under Section 14 with the Arun
Parivar Patra ID, bank account number and Aadhaar number in such manner, as may
be prescribed.
(3) Once the seeding of the departmental data base is completed, the departments shall
not create any further data base at its own level and shall use identity information and
photograph of a family or any of its members available in Arun Parivar Patra Resident
Data Repository for transfer of any public welfare benefits and delivery of service in
future.
17. Transaction mapper : Every transaction of public welfare benefits or services notified
under Section 7 of the Central Act and the public welfare benefits or services notified
under Section 4 of this Act shall be recorded electronically in such manner, as may be
prescribed
18. Social Audit :
(1) Social audit of the delivery of public welfare benefits shall be conducted at such
intervals and in such manner, as may be prescribed in the Gram Sabhas in rural
areas and the Ward Committees in urban areas or any other forum specified by the
State Government by notification.
(2) Particulars of the delivery of public welfare benefits shall invariably be uploaded on the
Arun Parivar Patra Resident Data Repository of the State.
Explanation: For the purpose of this Section, the expression “Gram Sabha” and
“Ward Committee” shall have same meaning as assigned to them respectively in
the Arunachal Pradesh Panchayat Raj Act, 1997 (Act No.5 of 2001) and the Arunachal
Pradesh Municipal Corporation Act, 2019 (Act No. 8 of 2019).
CHAPTER-VI
Arun Parivar Patra Authority
19. Establishment and Constitution of the Authority:
(1) The State Government shall, as soon as may be, after commencement of this Act,
by notification, establish and constitute an Authority to be called as the Arunachal
Pradesh Arun Parivar Patra Authority to exercise powers and discharge functions of
the Authority under this Act or the rules or regulations made thereunder.
(2) The Authority shall be a body corporate by the name aforesaid, having perpetual
succession and a common seal, with power, subject to the provisions of this Act, to
acquire, hold and dispose of property, both movable and immovable, and to contract
and may, by the said name, sue or be sued.
(3) The headquarter of the Authority shall be at Itanagar.
(4) The Authority may, with the prior approval of the State Government, establish its
offices at other places in the State.
(5) The Authority shall consist of a Chairperson and such number of official and non- official
members, as the State Government may appoint.
(6) The Chief Secretary of the State shall be the ex-officio Chairperson of the Authority.
20. Powers and functions of the Authority. - The Authority shall exercise the following
powers and discharge the following functions, namely
(a) to specify, by regulations, the terms and conditions for appointment of Registrars
and enrolling agencies and revocation of appointments thereof;
(b) to expand existing electronic infrastructure for delivery of public welfare benefits and
other services to the beneficiaries;
(c) to create, monitor and maintain Arun Parivar Patra Resident Data Repository;
(d) to frame policy for the use of the Arun Parivar Patra Resident Data Repository;
(e) to recommend to the State Government for adding new services to the Arun Parivar
Patra Platform;
(f) to take appropriate steps for financial inclusion of the residents of the State in
collaboration with the line agencies;
6 The Arunachal Pradesh Extraordinary Gazette, April 7, 2025
(g) to monitor the implementation of its recommendations;
(h) to coordinate between different Government departments and Government bodies;
(i) to monitor public welfare benefits and services provided through Arun Parivar Patra
Platform:
(j) to frame and amend the regulations;
(k) to appoint committees or task forces or groups or sub-committees as may be necessary
to assist the authority in discharging its functions;
(l) to invite experts as and when required to its meetings;
(m) to acquire by purchase, exchange, lease, hire or otherwise any property movable or
immovable as may be necessary or convenient for carrying on the activities of the
Authority;
(n) to accept aid, Corporate Social Responsibility or any other assistance;
(o) to borrow money from Government, Banks, Financial Institutions with prior approval
of the State Government;
(p) to design a common mechanism for synchronizing and integrating different databases
available in the State and at the national level with Arun Parivar Patra Resident Data
Repository;
(q) to design the precise and comprehensive e-Arun Parivar Patra Resident Data
Repository by de-duplicating the family and individual databases stored in different
formats;
(r) to maintain dashboards and generate analytical reports- periodically and on-demand
by the State Government;
(s) to coordinate with the technical teams of line departments;
(t) to create opportunities for the Institutional Finance (loaning) for weaker section of the
society by engaging various financial institutions (National Bank for Agriculture and
Rural Development etc.);
(u) to coordinate with the banks for creation of Banking Correspondent Network;
(v) to appoint Banking Correspondent and manage Banking Correspondent Network;
(w) to augment infrastructure for propagation of digital payments and Aadhaar Enabled
Payments;
(x) to provide cash withdrawal and transactional facilities in unbanked areas;
(y) to coordinate with the banks through State Level Bankers Committee and to expand
banking coverage;
(z) to expand credit and insurance schemes;
(za) to establish ATMs in revenue villages;
(zb) to regulate the Common Service Centre (CSC) network through framing regulations
under the Authority;
(zc) to maintain and augment CSC network;
(zd) to re-furnish the present network of CSC by strengthening the kiosks with more
automation and mechanization;
(ze) to develop CSC as physical delivery Repository for e-Commerce services;
(zf) to ensure delivery of certificates etc. at the doorstep by the CSC through incentivizing
the CSC for delivery;
(zg) to establish and maintain the CSC Plus Kiosk network;
(zh) to train CSC kiosk operators with the help of officials from banks, line departments
and e-commerce experts; and
(zi) to exercise such other powers and discharge such other functions as may be
necessary, incidental or conducive, for carrying out the purposes of this Act.
21. Term of office and other conditions of service of the non-official member:
(1) A non-official member of the authority shall hold office for a term three years from the
date on which he/she enters the office or during the pleasure of the State Government
whichever is earlier.
(2) The allowance payable to and other terms and conditions of service of the non official
members shall be as such as may be prescribed.
(3) The non-official member may resign his office by giving notice in writing to the State
Government and on such resignation being accepted by the State Government, such
non-official member shall be deemed to have vacated his office.
The Arunachal Pradesh Extraordinary Gazette, April 7, 2025 7
22. Meetings of the Authority:
(1) The Authority shall meet at least once in a year at such place and such time as its
Chairperson may decide and shall observe such rules of procedure, including quorum
at such meetings, in regard to the transaction of the business at its meetings, as
may be laid down by regulations.
(2) The Chairperson, or, if for any reason he/she is unable to attend any meeting of the
Authority, any other member chosen by the members present at the meeting, shall
preside over the meeting.
(3) All questions which come up before any meeting of the Authority shall be decided by
a majority of the votes of the members present and voting, and, in the event of an
equality of votes, the Chairperson, or in his/her absence, the person presiding, shall
have and exercise a second or casting vote.
23. Constitution of the Executive Committee:
(1) The State Government shall, by notification, constitute an Executive Committee of
the Authority under the ex-officio Chairmanship of the Secretary (Planning & Investment).
(2) The Executive Committee shall exercise such powers and perform such duties as
may be delegated to it by the Authority from time to time.
(3) The Executive Committee shall meet at least once in three months at such place and
such time, as its Chairperson may decide and shall observe such rules of procedure,
including quorum at such meetings, in regard to the transaction of the business at its
meetings, as may be laid down by regulations.
(4) The Chairperson or, if for any reason he is unable to attend any meeting of the Executive
Committee, any other member chosen by the members present at the meeting shall
preside over the meeting.
(5) All questions which come up before any meeting of the Executive Committee shall be
decided by a majority of the votes of the members present and voting, and, in the
event of an equality of votes, the Chairperson, or in his/her absence, the person
presiding, shall have and exercise a second or casting vote.
24. Authentication of orders of the Authority and Executive Committee: All orders,
decisions and other instruments of the Authority and the Executive Committee shall be
authenticated by the signatures of the Chairperson of the Authority or, as the case may
be, the Executive Committee or any other member or any officer of the Authority or, as the
case may be, the Executive Committee authorized by it in this behalf.
25. Appointment of the Director General: There shall be appointed by the State Government
an officer not below the rank of the Commissioner /Secretary to the Government to be the
Director General (ex-officio) of the Authority. He/She shall, subject to the general control
of the Authority, exercise the following powers, perform the following functions and discharge
the following duties, namely:
(a) to supervise and control all officers and servants of the Authority;
(b) to work out modalities of delivery of the public welfare benefits and other services and
ensure their effective monitoring and implementation;
(c) to manage the properties, records and funds of the Authority;
(d) to maintain true and proper accounts of the Authority including checking and auditing
in respect thereof periodically;
(e) to prepare annual income and expenditure accounts and balance sheet of the Authority;
(f) to maintain up-to-date and complete statistical information, including progress made
in the implementation of various programmes from time to time;
(g) to process project proposals for financial assistance and issue utilization certificates
thereof;
(h) to convene meetings, seminars and workshops connected with the main objectives of
the Authority and preparation of reports and follow-up action thereon;
(i) to produce video, documentary films, publicity material, literature and publications to
inform general public about the various aspects of the Authority; and
(j) to perform such other functions as may be delegated to him by the Authority.
8 The Arunachal Pradesh Extraordinary Gazette, April 7, 2025
26. Appointment of officers and employees:
(1) The Authority may, with the prior approval of the State Government, create such number
and category of posts of officers and other employees in the Authority as it may
consider necessary to carry out its functions under this Act and may make appointment
thereto.
(2) The salary and allowances and other terms and conditions of service of the officers
and employees of the Authority shall be such as may be determined by the Authority
by regulations with the prior approval of the State Government and shall be paid out
from its Fund.
CHAPTER - VII
Grants, Accounts, Audit and Annual Report
27. Grants by the State Government to the Authority : The State Government shall, after
due appropriation made by the State Legislature by law in this behalf, pay to the Authority
by way of grants such sum of money as the State Government may think fit for being
utilize for the purposes of this Act.
28. Fund of the Authority : (1) There shall be established a fund known as the Arunachal
Pradesh Arun Parivar Patra Authority Fund for the purposes of this Act.
(2) In addition to the sum of money paid by the State Government under Section 27, the
following shall be credited to the Fund, namely :
(a) aids and loans raised by the Authority with the prior approval of the Finance
Department ;
(b) any sum of money received by the Authority by way of fees;
(c) any other sum of money received by the Authority with the prior approval of the
Finance Department.
(3) The Fund shall be utilized by the Authority to meet out the expenses incurred in
carrying out the purposes of this Act including payment of allowances to the non-official
members of the Authority, payment of salaries and allowances to the officers and
staff of the Authority
29. Budget of the Authority : (1) The Authority shall prepare in each financial year, in such
form and at such time as may be prescribed, its budget for the next financial year, showing
the estimated receipts and expenditure of the Authority and forward the same for the
approval of the State Government.
(2) The Authority shall not incur any expenditure otherwise than in accordance with the
budget provisions as approved by the State Government.
30. Annual report : The Authority shall prepare, in such form and a such time as may be
prescribed, its annual report, giving a full account of its activities during the previous
financial year and its plans for the coming year, and submit a copy there of to the State
Government. Every annual report shall also contain a review of the performance of the
Authority in respect of the plans contained in the preceding annual report.
31. Accounts and audit : (1) The accounts of the Authority shall be maintained in such form
and manner as may be prescribed and shall be audited by the Accountant General or by
such other person or body as the State Government may determine from time to time.
(2) The Authority shall furnish to the State Government before such date as may be
prescribed a copy of its audited accounts together with the auditor’s report thereon.
32. Annual report and auditor’s report to be laid before the House of the State
Legislature: The State Government shall cause the annual report of the Authority and
the auditor’s report to be laid, as soon as may be, after they are received, before the
House of the State Legislature.
CHAPTER - VIII
Offences and Penalties
33. Penalty for non-compliance of provisions relating to security and confidentiality
of information : Whoever shares or publishes the identity information and photograph of
a Arun Parivar Patra card holder in contravention of the Section 10 shall be punishable
with fine which may extend to ten thousand rupees and shall be liable to compensate the
person who is adversely affected by such contravention.
The Arunachal Pradesh Extraordinary Gazette, April 7, 2025 9
34. Penalty for unauthorized use by requesting entity : Whoever, being a requesting
entity, uses the identity information of an individual in contravention of Section 12 shall be
punishable with fine which may extend to ten thousand rupees and shall be liable to
compensate the person who is adversely affected by such contravention.
34A. Penalty for furnishing wrong information : Whoever, deliberately provides false or
incorrect information for the purpose of obtaining or updating Arun Parvar Patra shall be
punishable with a fine which may extend to ten thousand rupees and shall be liable to
compensate the Government for the benefit so received on the basis of wrong or false
information.
35. Offences by companies : (1) Where an offence under this Act has been committed by
a company, every person who at the time the offence was committed was in-charge of,
and was responsible to, the company for the conduct of the business of the company, as
well as the company, shall be deemed to be guilty of the offence and shall be liable to be
proceeded against and punished accordingly :
Provided that nothing contained in this sub-section shall render any such person
liable to any punishment provided in this Act if he proves that the offence was committed
without his knowledge or that he had exercised all due diligence to prevent the commission
of such offence.
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (1), where any offence under
this Act has been committed by a company and it is proved that the offence has
been committed with the consent or connivance of, or is attributable to, any neglect
on the part of any director, manager, secretary or other officer of the company, such
director, manager, secretary or other officer shall also be deemed to be guilty of the
offence and shall be liable to be proceeded against and punished accordingly.
Explanation : For the purposes of this section-
(a) “company” means anybody corporate, and includes a firm or other association
ofindividuals; and
(b) “director” in relation to a firm, means a partner in the firm.
CHAPTER - IX
Miscellaneous
36. Members, officers, etc., to be public servants : The Chairperson and members of the
Authority and the Executive Committee and officers and other employees of the Authority
and the Executive Committee shall be deemed, while acting or purporting to act in
pursuance of any of the provisions of this Act, to be public servants within the meaning of
Section 2(28) of the Bharatiya Nyaya Sanhita, 2023.
37. Power of State Government to issue directions : (1) Without prejudice to the foregoing
provisions of this Act, the Authority shall, in exercise of its powers or the performance of
its functions under this Act, be bound by such directions on questions of policy, as the
State Government may give, in writing to it, from time to time.
(2) The decision of the State Government, whether a question is one of policy or not,
shall be final.
38. Delegation of powers and functions : The Authority may, by general or special order in
writing, delegate to the Executive Committee, any member or officer of the Authority or
any other person, subject to such conditions, if any, as may be specified in the order,
such of its powers and functions under this Act, except the power under Section 40, as
it may deem necessary.
39. Protection of action taken in good faith : No suit, prosecution or other legal proceeding
shall lie against the State Government or the Authority or the Executive Committee or the
Chairperson or any member of the Authority or the Executive Committee or any officer or
other employee of the Authority or the Executive Committee for anything which is in good
faith done or intended to be done under this Act or the rule or regulation made thereunder.
40. Power of State Government to make rules : The State Government may, by notification,
make rules to carry out the provisions of this Act.
41. Power of Authority to make regulations: The Authority may, by notification, make
regulations consistent with this Act and the rules made thereunder to provide for the
matters which are required by this Act to be provided by regulation.
10 The Arunachal Pradesh Extraordinary Gazette, April 7, 2025
42. Rules and regulations to be laid before the House of the State Legislature : Every
rule and regulation made under this Act shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is so
made, before the House of the State Legislature, while it is in session, for a period of not
less than fourteen days which may be comprised in one session or in two or more
successive sessions and if before the expiry of the session in which it is so laid or of the
sessions immediately following, the House of the State Legislature makes any modification
in the rule or regulation or resolves that the rule or regulation should not be made, the rule
or regulation shall thereafter have effect only in such modified form or be of no effect, as
the case may be, so, however, that any such modification or annulment shall be without
prejudice to the validity of anything previously done thereunder.
43. Application of other laws not barred : The provisions of this Act shall be in addition to,
and no in derogation of, any other law for the time being in force.
44. Power to remove difficulties : (1) If any difficulty arises in giving effect to the provision
of this Act, the State Government may, by order, published in the Official Gazette, make
such provisions not inconsistent with the provisions of this Act as may appear to be
necessary for removing the difficulty :
(2) Every order made under this section shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is
made, before the House of the State Legislature.
Yashpal Garg, IAS
Commissioner to the
Government of Arunachal Pradesh,
Itanagar.
———————
Published and Printed by Directorate of Printing and Stationery, Naharlagun-207/2025-DoP-250+ Secy. (LA)-50+
Commir. (Law)-50+Secy. Palnning & Investment)-50-4-2025.
