The Andhra Pradesh State Teachers Transfers Regulation Act, 2025
Act No. 9 of 2025
DISCLAIMER: This document is being furnished to you for your information by PRS Legislative Research
(PRS). The contents of this document have been obtained from sources PRS believes to be reliable. These
contents have not been independently verified, and PRS makes no representation or warranty as to the accuracy,
completeness or correctness. In some cases the Principal Act and/or Amendment Act may not be available.
Principal Acts may or may not include subsequent amendments. For authoritative text, please contact the relevant
state department concerned or refer to the latest government publication or the gazette notification. Any person
using this material should take their own professional and legal advice before acting on any information contained
in this document. PRS or any persons connected with it do not accept any liability arising from the use of this
document. PRS or any persons connected with it shall not be in any way responsible for any loss, damage, or
distress to any person on account of any action taken or not taken on the basis of this document.
4th April, 2025] ANDHRA PRADESH GAZETTE EXTRAORDINARY 1
Registered No. HSE/49. [Price : Rs.2-00 Paise

THE ANDHRA PRADESH GAZETTE
PART IV-B EXTRAORDINARY
PUBLISHED BY AUTHORITY
No. 9] AMARAVATI, FRIDAY, 4th APRIL, 2025.
ANDHRA PRADESH ACTS, ORDINANCES AND
REGULATIONS Etc.,
The following Act of the Andhra Pradesh Legislature received the assent
of the Governor on the 3rd April, 2025 and the said assent is hereby first
published on the 4th April, 2025 in the Andhra Pradesh Gazette for general
information :
ACT No. 9 of 2025
AN ACT TO ENACT THE ANDHRA PRADESH STATE TEACHERS
TRANSFERS REGULATION ACT, 2025.
Be it enacted by the Legislature of the State of Andhra Pradesh in
the Seventy-sixth Year of the Republic of India, as follows:-
1. (1) This Act may be called the Andhra Pradesh State Teachers Short title and
commencement.
Transfers Regulation Act, 2025.
(2) It extends to the whole State of Andhra Pradesh.
(3) It shall come into force on such date as the Government
may, by notification in the Andhra Pradesh Gazette, appoint.
2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,-
(i) “Academic year” means June 1st of the every year to May 31st Definitions.
of next year;
Note:- Headmaster Gr.II/Teacher who have completed
minimum of nine months of their service in one
J-3/43 [1]
2 ANDHRA PRADESH GAZETTE EXTRAORDINARY [PART IV-A
academic year shall be treated as one complete
academic year.
(ii) “Appointment” means appointment by direct recruitment, by
absorption or by transfer or by promotion;
(iii) “Appointing Authority” means the authority competent to
make an appointment to the post of Headmaster Gr.II/Teacher
according to the provisions of the relevant Service Rules for
the time being in force;
(iv) “Ban Period” means the period during which transfers of
Headmaster Gr.II/Teacher not to effect, as specified by the
Government from time to time;
(v) “Cluster” means a group of Primary, Upper Primary and High
Schools within the Mandal;
(vi) “Competent authority” means in case of Headmaster Gr.II,
Regional Joint Director of School Education and whereas for
teachers, District Educational Officer or any officer notified by
the Government from time to time;
(vii) “Headmaster Gr.II “ means Headmaster of High school
working against the sanctioned post;
(viii) “Teacher” means a person appointed to a category of post
as a teacher, in a Primary or Upper Primary or High School
and such other posts as specified in the Schedule;
(ix) “Maximum Period” means,-
(a) Continuous service of Five academic years for
Headmaster Gr.II from the date of joining in their
respective School.
(b) Continuous service of Eight academic years for Teachers
from the date of joining in their respective School.
(x) “Minimum Period” means continuous service of two
academic years in the cadre of Headmaster Gr.II/Teacher from
the date of joining in their respective school;
4th April, 2025] ANDHRA PRADESH GAZETTE EXTRAORDINARY 3
(xi) “Needy Schools” means schools in which Headmaster Gr.II/
Teacher are required as per Pupil Teacher Ratio (PTR) under
RTE Act or the norms defined by the Government for
Re-apportionment;
(xii) “Urban Area” means the areas,-
(a) Category I - All the areas within the limits of a district
headquarters, the limits of a City Corporation and the
area notified by the State Government from time to time
as meriting the existing House Rent Allowance(HRA);
(b) Category - II - All Habitations/Municipalities or Nagar
Panchayats and the area notified by the State
Government from time to time as meriting the existing
House Rent Allowance (HRA);
(c) As per norms defined by the Government from time-to-
time.
(xiii) “Rural Area” means,-
(a) The areas of all Habitations where 12%(RPS-2015),
10%(RPS-2020) House Rent Allowance (HRA) as per the
orders issued by the Government from time to time is
admissible;
(b) Category III - All Mandal headquarters not covered in
Category I & II and all Habitations/Villages are having
the all-weather road connectivity;
(c) Category IV - Habitations/villages which do not cover in
Category III including Hilltop area schools;
(d) As per norms defined by the Government from time-to-
time.
(xiv) Re-apportionment means the process of reallocating surplus
Central Act No 35
teacher posts to the needy schools based on the Pupil-Teacher of 2009.
Ratio (PTR) prescribed under the Right To Education Act, 2009
and accordingly, determined by the State Government;
(xv) “Transfer” means the posting of a Headmaster Gr.II/Teacher
from one school to another school;
4 ANDHRA PRADESH GAZETTE EXTRAORDINARY [PART IV-A
(xvi) Teacher Adjustment means any orders issued by the
competent authority adjusting the surplus teachers to that of
needy schools on administrative grounds as per section 14 of
this Act;
(xvii) “School” means Primary, Upper Primary and High School
under the management of Government/ Mandal Parishad/ Zilla
Parishad/ Municipal/ Municipal Corporation as the case may
be;
(xviii)“Schedule” means the Schedule appended to this Act;
(xix) “Surplus” means Headmaster Gr-II/ Teacher has been
identified by competent authority to be more than the required
teachers at the respective school as per RTE Act/
Re-apportionment norms;
(xx) “Unit of Seniority” means,-
(a) Zone: Headmaster Gr.II (Govt.Schools) whose initial
appointment in Government Schools;
(b) District (erstwhile): Headmaster Gr.II (MP/ZP), School
Assistant, Secondary Grade Teacher and equivalent
cadres in Government/Mandal Parishad/ Zilla Parishad
management of Primary, Upper Primary and High
Schools;
(c) District (erstwhile): Headmaster Gr.II, School Assistant,
Secondary Grade Teacher and equivalent cadres in
Municipal Management Schools in Municipalities/
Municipal Corporations/Greater Visakhapatnam
Municipal Corporation /Vijayawada Municipal
Corporation of Primary, Upper Primary and High Schools.
Compulsory 3. (1) Every Appointing Authority while giving first posting
Appointment of a
Head Master Gr.II/ on initial Appointment or Promotion of a Head Master Gr.II/
Teacher in Rural
Areas i.e., Teacher to a School shall ensure that vacancies in Rural Areas
Category III or IV.
i.e., Category III or IV shall be filled in the first instance.
4th April, 2025] ANDHRA PRADESH GAZETTE EXTRAORDINARY 5
(2) If no vacancy is available for posting on initial
Appointment or Promotion in Category III or IV, then a Head
Master Gr.II/ Teacher may be posted to a school in order of
Category I or II.
Note : The provisions mentioned in clause (i) and (ii) do not
apply to the Head Master Gr.II/ Teacher appointed in Municipal
Schools/ Municipal Corporation Schools.
4. (1) The sanctioned posts and the Headmaster Gr.II/ Teacher Re-apportionment
of Teachers.
working thereof in a school shall be re­apportioned based
on the Pupil-Teacher ratio fixed by the State Government
from time to time.
(2) After re-apportionment, the excess posts of a Headmaster
Gr.II/ Teacher in any school shall be shifted to any other
needy school. The excess teachers so determined shall
be transferred through counseling, based on the order of
priority, subject to such other conditions as may be
prescribed by the Government from time to time.
(3) Separate guidelines will be issued by the Government to
Headmaster Gr.II/Teacher who are affected under re-
apportionment.
5. (1) Provided that a Headmaster Gr.II/ Teacher who has Criteria for
transfer of a
completed maximum period of service in a particular Headmaster Gr.II/
Teacher.
school, shall be transferred compulsorily.
(2) Provided that a Headmaster Gr.II/ Teacher who has served
a minimum period of service in Category I/II/III/IV shall be
offered the option to seek transfer, based on their service,
subject to availability of vacancies.
(3) Headmaster Gr.II/Teacher who are going to retire within 2
years from May 31st of that year shall not be transferred,
until and unless they request for transfer.
(4) Transfers shall be affected within their appointed
management.
6 ANDHRA PRADESH GAZETTE EXTRAORDINARY [PART IV-A
(5) A Male Headmaster Gr.II/ Teacher aged below 50 years
as on May 31st of that year and working in Girls High School
shall be transferred mandatorily.
(6) If no women Headmaster Gr.II/ Teacher are available to
work in Girls High School, then the male Headmaster Gr.II/
Teacher who crossed 50 years of age as on May 31st of
that year shall be considered for posting to such schools.
(7) The Headmaster Gr.II who have completed 5 academic
years of service and teacher who have completed 8
academic years of service as NCC officers should be
posted in a vacancy in a school where there is an NCC
unit. If no vacancy is available in another school having NCC
unit they shall be continued in the same school on their
request. If any NCC officer facing disciplinary proceedings,
that NCC officer shall be transferred.
(8) A teacher who is facing charges under the Protection of
Children from Sexual Offences Act, 2012/girl child abuse
Central Act No. 32 case, shall not be opted to the same Mandal/Municipality
of 2012.
or any Girls High School. In case of Municipal Corporation
Schools, teacher shall be posted in distant places.
(9) If Article of Charges are pending against the Headmaster
Gr.II/ Teacher, he/she shall not be considered for request
transfer.
Notification of 6. (1) Government will notify the vacancies,-
Vacancies.
(i) Clear vacancies including retirement vacancies;
(ii) Vacancies under compulsory transfer;
(iii) Reapportionment vacancies;
(iv) Vacancies arise out of unauthorized absence for one
year or more than one year as on the date of issuance of
transfer guidelines;
(v) Study leave vacancies;
4th April, 2025] ANDHRA PRADESH GAZETTE EXTRAORDINARY 7
(vi) Resultant vacancies during transfer counseling.
(2) Provision of blocking of vacancies,-
(i) In case of any surplus vacancies identified in the
District, those vacancies shall be equitably distributed
among the Mandals in the District;
(ii) Separate guidelines for blocking of vacancies shall
be issued by the Government from time to time.
7. (1) The transfer of a Headmaster Gr.II/Teacher under this Act
Transfers by
counseling.
shall be done through a process of web-based counselling
conducted in such a manner as may be prescribed from
time to time.
(2) Headmaster Gr.II/Teacher cannot claim transfer as a
matter of right and these guidelines does not intend or
confer any right for posting at desired places.
(3) While implementing the transfers, the State Government
shall constitute the Committees at the State & District
levels for ensuring the counselling process in a transparent
manner.
8. All posts specified in the Schedule shall be filled only through Transfer of
Headmaster Gr.II/
online counseling based on the points as per sections 9 Teacher to the
posts specified in
and 10. the Schedule.
9. (1) Station points shall be awarded to the Headmaster Gr.II/ Entitlement
Points.
Teacher based on the number of years of service in the
respective school, as outlined below,-
(i) Category- I area- 1 point/ year;
(ii) Category- II area - 2 points/ year;
(iii) Category- III area - 3 points/ year;
(iv) Category- IV area - 5 points/ year.
In the case of villages or towns that were initially
categorized under one category and later reclassified to
8 ANDHRA PRADESH GAZETTE EXTRAORDINARY [PART IV-A
another category (as per HRA or road conditions), then the
station points shall be calculated proportionately.
Provided that the persons working in the ITDA areas
notified by the Government from time to time, will get an
additional 1 point per year in addition to the station points.
(2) Service Points:
For the service rendered: 0.5 point shall be awarded to
Headmaster Gr.II/Teacher for completed year of service in all
cadres, as of May 31st of that year.
10. (1) Special points in transfers shall be provided,-
Special Points in
transfers.
(i) To the Headmaster Gr.II/Teacher whose spouse is employed
in State/Central Government/Public Sector Undertakings/
Local Bodies or Aided Institutions and also to the regular
employees working in Educational Societies running under
State Government.
(ii) The benefit of spouse points shall apply to one of the
spouses once in 5/8 academic years only.
(2) Un-married Women teachers who are above 40 years of
age.
(3) (i) Physically handicapped i.e., from 40% to 55% of
Disability, to Visually challenged/Orthopedically challenged /
Hearing impaired employees.
(ii) Physically handicapped i.e., from 56% to 69% of Disability,
to Visually challenged/ Orthopedically challenged/ Hearing
impaired employees.
(4) President and General Secretary of Recognized Teachers
Unions at State/District Level(Erstwhile Districts).
(5) Legally Separated Women, Ex-servicemen in Army/ Navy/
Air Force/BSF/CRPF/CISF now working as teacher and
4th April, 2025] ANDHRA PRADESH GAZETTE EXTRAORDINARY 9
spouse of the service person in Army/ Navy /Air Force/ BSF/
CRPF/CISF.
(6) The Scouts and Guides unit who is operating for the past
two years at the time of consideration.
Note: Government will indicate the points from time to time.
11. (1) Preferential category for transfers are as follows,-
Preferential
category for
(i) Physically handicapped i.e., more than or equal to 80 % to transfers.
Visually challenged/ Orthopedically challenged employees.
(ii) Physically handicapped i.e more than or equal to 70 % to
Visually challenged/ Orthopedically challenged/ Hearing
impaired employees.
(iii) widow (it will not applicable in case of remarriage)
(iv) Headmaster Gr.II/Teacher who is suffering from the
following diseases, in which he/she undergoing treatment:
(a) Cancer;
(b) Open Heart Surgery/Correction of Atrial Septal Defect
/Organ Transplantation;
(c) Major Neuro Surgery;
(d) Bone TB;
(e) Kidney Transplantation/ Dialysis; and
(f) Spinal Surgery.
(v) Headmaster Gr.II/Teacher with dependent children and
spouse who are mentally challenged and are undergoing
treatment.
(vi) Headmaster Gr.II/Teacher with dependent children
suffering with Juvenile Diabetes/ Thalassemia Disease/
Haemophilia Disease/Muscular Dystrophy and are ongoing
treatment.
Note:-
(A) Headmaster Gr.II/Teacher those who have
applied for transfer under above category shall submit
10 ANDHRA PRADESH GAZETTE EXTRAORDINARY [PART IV-A
all Medical Reports/Certificates certified by the
District/State Medical Board afresh through online and
no old Certificates will be allowed.
(B) The Headmaster Gr.II/Teacher should avail of
either the preferential categories or special points once
in 5/8 years respectively.
(2) Preference shall be given to the Headmaster Gr.II/
Teacher who have dependent children who born with congenital
heart defect(holes in Heart) and who have undergone surgery
shall be considered under preferential category within (3) years
from the date of surgery.
(3) However, for the categories specified in sub section (1) -
(i) For Secondary Grade Teachers - 40% of vacancies
will be filled in a particular school.
(ii) For School Assistants - 50% of vacancies in each
subject will be filled in a particular school.
(iii) For School Assistants in Single Subject Teacher
High Schools will not be considered.
12. Government shall issue separate guidelines from time to time
Performance of
teachers.
on performance points.
13. In case of unauthorized absence, one point shall be deducted
Negative Points.
for each month of absence limited to maximum 10 points,
besides the punishment awarded under disciplinary
proceedings. Negative points will be awarded for the
unauthorized absence after the date of commencement of the
Act.
Teacher 14. The competent authority, may adjust the surplus teachers to
adjustment.
that of needy schools on administrative grounds as and when
permitted by the Government.
4th April, 2025] ANDHRA PRADESH GAZETTE EXTRAORDINARY 11
15. Government is the competent authority to consider transfers
In case of
Request/Mutual/
of request/mutual/Inter District/Inter State.
Inter District/Inter
State Transfer.
If any Headmaster Grade II or Teacher is transferred
on request or mutual grounds during the ban period then the
period worked in both stations shall be taken into account to
calculate the maximum period when determining eligibility for
compulsory transfer.
16. (1) General Transfers will be made only once in a year, as per
Transfers
Calendar.
the time schedule mentioned in section 7 or as notified by the
Government from time to time.
(2) Transfers can be effected by the Government at any time
during the year in cases of administrative exigency.
17. (1) Government shall constitute Grievance Redressal Grievance/ Appeal
Redressal.
Committees at District/Zonal/State Level under the
Chairmanship of District Educational Officer/ Regional Joint
Director of School Education/ Commissioner/Director of
School Education.
(2) Government shall issue guidelines for Grievance Redressal
Committees to dispose the grievances.
(3) Notwithstanding anything above, he/she can approach
Hon’ble Courts only after exhausting the Grievance Redressal
Mechanism at all levels.
18. (1) Before conduct of transfer counselling, reapportionment Miscellaneous.
shall be completed, then after completion of transfers, it is open
to the competent authority to conduct teacher adjustment if any.
(2) Government shall issue a separate guidelines for
conducting transfer counselling every year in accordance with
the rules prescribed hereunder.
(3) If there is any contradiction in the guidelines, the rules
mentioned in Act shall prevail.
(4) During the issuance of transfer guidelines by the
Government, the same shall specify the number of points to
be allotted under special/reapportionment.
12 ANDHRA PRADESH GAZETTE EXTRAORDINARY [PART IV-A
(5) In case, the entitlement points of two or more applicants
are equal then the following shall be taken into consideration
sequentially,-
(i) The seniority in the cadre shall be taken into account.
(ii) Priority to the candidate based on the date of birth (senior)
besides clause (i).
(iii) Women.
(6) In case of any disciplinary issues with Headmaster Gr.II/
Teacher, the competent authority can transfer to other places
with the approval of District Collector.
(7) Restriction on Non-Educational Duties outside the
Department:
As per Sections 25(2) and 27 of the Right to Education
Central Act No 35
of 2009.
Act, 2009, Headmaster Gr.II/ Teacher shall not be assigned
non-educational duties except for census, disaster relief, or
election work. As such Headmasters Gr.II/ teachers cannot be
transferred/deputed outside the School Education Department.
Transfer with the 19. Not with standing anything contained in any other law for the
approval of the
Government. time being in force or the provisions of this Act, the Appointing
Authority, after obtaining approval from the State Government,
in the interest of education or in the interest of public service
for administrative reasons or in the larger public interest may
transfer the services of any Headmaster Gr.II/Teacher to any
other school.
Offences and 20. (1) Violation of any of the provisions of this Act, shall be treated
Penalties.
as commission of an offence punishable under this Act.
(2) If any Headmaster Gr.II/Teacher submits false information
/false documents/ medical reports shall be liable for
disciplinary action as per APCS (CC&A) Rules, 1991 and they
shall be transferred to category -IV School and should work
mandatorily for 5/8 years without any transfer.
4th April, 2025] ANDHRA PRADESH GAZETTE EXTRAORDINARY 13
(3) Any officer who have countersigned the false information/
false documents/ medical reports shall be liable for disciplinary
action as per APCS (CC&A) Rules, 1991 in addition to
prosecution as per rules.
(4) If any competent authority makes an order of posting or
appointment or transfer in contravention to the provisions of
this Act or the Rules made there under, such competent
authority or officer, as the case may be, shall be liable for
disciplinary action as per APCS (CC&A) Rules, 1991.
(5) If any Headmaster Gr.II/Teacher who are to be compulsorily
transferred and who do not apply for counselling, shall be given
posting orders in absentia to the leftover needy vacancies at
category IV only, if category IV vacancies are not available
then allot at category III at the end of the web counselling of
that particular category of teachers.
21. No Court shall take cognizance of any offence under this Act
Cognizance of
offences.
except on a complaint made in writing by an officer authorized
by the Government by notification published on this behalf in
the Official Gazette.
22. The provisions of this Act shall have an overriding effect, Act to override
other laws.
notwithstanding anything inconsistent therewith contained in
any other law for the time being in force.
23. (1) If any difficulty arises in giving effect to the provisions of Power to remove
difficulties.
this Act, the State Government may, by Order publish in the
official Gazette make provisions, not inconsistent with the
provisions of this Act, as it appears to be necessary or
expedient for removing that difficulty.
Provided that no such order shall be made after the expiry
of a period of two years from the date of commencement of
this Act.
(2) Every order made under this section shall be laid as soon
as may be after it is made, before each House of Legislature.
14 ANDHRA PRADESH GAZETTE EXTRAORDINARY [PART IV-A
Power to amend 24. The State Government may, by notification, add, alter or remove
the Schedule.
any of the entries specified in the Schedule.
Protection of action 25. No suit, prosecution or another legal proceeding shall lie
taken in good faith.
against any officer of the Government for anything which is
done or intended to be done in good faith under this Act or the
rules made there under.
26. (1) The State Government, may by notification, in the Andhra
Power to make
rules.
Pradesh Gazette, make rules to carry out all or any of the
purposes of this Act.
(2) Every rule made under this Act shall immediately after it is
made, be laid before the State Legislature if it is in session,
and if it is not in session, in the session immediately following
for a total period of fourteen (14) days which may be comprised
in one session or in two (2) successive sessions, and if, before
the expiration of the session in which it is so laid or the session
immediately following, the Legislature agree in making any
modification in any rule or in the annulment of the rule, the rule
shall, with effect from the date of notification of such
modification of annulment in the Andhra Pradesh Gazette is
notified have effect only in such modify form or shall stand
annulled, as the case may be, so however, that any such
modification or annulment shall be without prejudice to the
validity of anything previously done under that rule.
27. This Act shall not apply to the following:
Non-Applicability
of Act.
(1) The Mandal Educational Officers working under School
Education Department.
(2) Teachers working in schools run by the Societies i.e.,
Andhra Pradesh Model Schools Society, Andhra Pradesh
Residential Educational Institutional Society and Kasturba
Gandhi Balika Vidyalayas (KGBVs).
(3) Teachers working under the Societies concerned, the
respective Society Bye-laws shall be applicable.
4th April, 2025] ANDHRA PRADESH GAZETTE EXTRAORDINARY 15
16 ANDHRA PRADESH GAZETTE EXTRAORDINARY [PART IV-A
4th April, 2025] ANDHRA PRADESH GAZETTE EXTRAORDINARY 17
STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
It is expedient to provide for the responsibility of the State Government
to regulate the transfers of teachers in Government/Zilla Parishad/Mandal
Parishad/ Municipal Schools/ Municipal Corporation Schools in accordance
with the requirement of teachers in schools in order to maintain Pupil Teacher
Ratio (PTR) norms prescribed in the Right of Children to Free and Compulsory
Education Act, 2009(Central Act No. 35 of 2009) and rules framed and norms
laid down there under for ensuring optimum utilization of manpower for effective
academic support to the students and for the prevention of adverse effect on
academic activities in schools.
In this regard, it is to,-
(i) streamline the process of transfer and posting of
Headmaster Gr.II/Teacher by providing options and
flexibilities to seek posting of their preference,
subject to the availability of vacancies.
(ii) ensure the filling up of vacancies in Rural Areas
(Category III and IV) and;
(iii) ensure to provide the teachers as per Pupil Teacher
Ratio (PTR) under the RTE Act, 2009/ Re-
apportionment Norms as decided by the
Government from time to time.
While effecting transfers, the academic interest of the students shall
be supreme. The other dominant considerations in effecting transfer will be
administrative exigencies/ ground and organizational reasons including the
need to maintain continuity, uninterrupted academic schedule and quality of
teaching and to that extent, the individual interest/requests shall be subservient.
Accordingly, it has been decided to undertake a specific legislation to
regulate transfer of Headmaster Gr.II/Teacher in the State.
GOTTAPU PRATIBHA DEVI,
Secretary to Government,
Legal and Legislative Affairs & Justice,
Law Department.
