AS INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA
Bill No. 105 of 2026
THE ANDHRA PRADESH REORGANISATION (AMENDMENT)
BILL, 2026
A
BILL
further to amend the Andhra Pradesh Reorganisation Act, 2014.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Seventy-seventh Year of the Republic of
India as follows:—
1. (1) This Act may be called the Andhra Pradesh Reorganisation Short title and
(Amendment) Act, 2026. commencement.
5 (2)It shall be deemed to have come into force on the 2nd day of June, 2024.
2
Amendment of 2. In the Andhra Pradesh Reorganisation Act, 2014, in section 5,––
Act 6 of 2014.
(a) in sub-section (2), for the words “and there shall be a new capital”,
the words “and Amaravati shall be the new capital” shall be substituted;
(b) the Explanation shall be numbered as Explanation 1 thereof and after
Explanation 1 as so numbered, the following Explanation shall be inserted, 5
namely:––
‘Explanation 2.––For the purposes of sub-section (2), the
expression “Amaravati” includes the capital city areas notified under the
provisions of the Andhra Pradesh Capital Region Development
Authority Act, 2014.’. 10 Andhra Pradesh
Act 11 of 2014.
STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
The Andhra Pradesh Reorganisation Act, 2014 (hereinafter referred to as the
said Act) was enacted to provide for the reorganisation of the erstwhile State of
Andhra Pradesh and for matters connected therewith. The provisions of section 5
of the said Act provide that on and from the appointed day, Hyderabad shall be the
common capital for the States of Telangana and Andhra Pradesh for such period not
exceeding ten years, after which Hyderabad shall be the capital of the State of
Telangana and there shall be a new capital for the successor State of Andhra
Pradesh.
2. Subsequent to enactment of the said Act, the Government of Andhra
Pradesh, after due consideration, consultation, and planning, identified and notified
“Amaravati” as the new capital of that State. Significant administrative and
legislative measures have been undertaken, besides the infrastructural developments
in and around Amaravati, with the objective of establishing it as the capital of the
State of Andhra Pradesh.
3. The Legislative Assembly of Andhra Pradesh passed a Resolution on the
28th March, 2026 requesting the Government of India for amending section 5 of the
said Act, so as to incorporate the name of “Amaravati” as the new capital of the
successor State of Andhra Pradesh.
4. Accordingly, in order to give effect to the said Resolution of the Legislative
Assembly of Andhra Pradesh and to provide statutory clarity regarding the capital
of the State of Andhra Pradesh, it is proposed to amend sub-section (2) of section 5
of the said Act to incorporate the name of “Amaravati” therein as the new capital of
the State of Andhra Pradesh with effect from the 2nd day of June, 2024.
5.The Bill seeks to achieve the above objectives.
NEW DELHI; AMIT SHAH.
The 30th March, 2026.
3
ANNEXURE
EXTRACT FROM THE ANDHRA PRADESH REORGANISATION ACT, 2014
(6 OF 2014)
* * * * *
Hyderabad to be 5.(1) * * * * *
common capital
for States of (2) After expiry of the period referred to in sub-section (1), Hyderabad shall
Telangana and be the capital of the State of Telangana and there shall be a new capital for the State
Andhra Pradesh.
of Andhra Pradesh.
Explanation.––In this Part, the common capital includes the existing area
notified as the Greater Hyderabad Municipal Corporation under the Hyderabad
Municipal Corporation Act, 1955. Hyderabad Act
No. 2 of 1956.
* * * * *
4
LOK SABHA
————
A
BILL
further to amend the Andhra Pradesh Reorganisation Act, 2014.
————
(Shri Amit Shah, Minister of Home Affairs and Cooperation)
