AS INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA
Bill No. 109 of 2025
THE INDIAN INSTITUTES OF MANAGEMENT
(AMENDMENT) BILL, 2025
A
BILL
further to amend the Indian Institutes of Management Act, 2017.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Seventy-sixth Year of the Republic of India
as follows:—
1. (1) This Act may be called the Indian Institutes of Management Short title and
(Amendment) Act, 2025. commencement.
5 (2) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by
notification in the Official Gazette, appoint.
2
Amendment of 2. In section 4 of the Indian Institutes of Management Act, 2017 (hereinafter 33 of 2017.
section 4. referred to as the principal Act),—
(i) for sub-section (1), the following sub-section shall be substituted,
namely:—
“(1) Every Institute shall be a body corporate by the same name as 5
mentioned in column (5) of the Schedule.”;
(ii) after sub-section (1A), the following sub-section shall be inserted,
namely:—
“(1B) On and from the date of commencement of the Indian
Institutes of Management (Amendment) Act, 2025, all the provisions of 10
this Act shall apply to the Indian Institute of Management, Guwahati.”.
Amendment of 3. In section 39 of the principal Act, in sub-section (1), after clause (f), the
section 39. following clause shall be inserted, namely:—
“(g) until the first Board of the Indian Institute of Management,
Guwahati is constituted under this Act, all the powers and functions which 15
may, by or under the provisions of this Act, be exercised or performed by or
on behalf of such Board on the commencement of the Indian Institutes of
Management (Amendment) Act, 2025, shall be exercised and performed by
such person or persons as the Central Government may direct in this behalf.”.
Amendment of 4. In the Schedule to the principal Act, after Sl. No. 21 and the entries relating 20
Schedule. thereto, the following Sl. No. and entries shall be inserted, namely:—
“22. Assam ------ Guwahati Indian Institute of
Management,
Guwahati.”.
3
STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
In 1961, the Government of India decided to establish two Indian Institutes of
Management (IIMs), one in Kolkata (then Calcutta) and another in Ahmedabad.
These specialised institutions were envisaged for increasing the pace of
management training and education in India. As demand for more such institutions
grew, four more IIMs at Bangalore (1973), Lucknow (1984), Indore (1996) and
Kozhikode (1997) were established. In the Eleventh plan, seven new IIMs at
Shillong (2008), Ranchi (2010), Rohtak (2010), Raipur (2010), Kashipur (2011),
Tiruchirappalli (2011) and Udaipur (2011) were established. During the year 2015-
16, seven more IIMs at Amritsar, Bodh Gaya, Jammu, Nagpur, Sambalpur, Sirmaur
and Visakhapatnam were established. These twenty IIMs were originally
established as a Society registered under the respective Societies Registration Acts.
Subsequently, with the enactment of the Indian Institutes of Management Act,
2017(33 of 2017), these IIM’s were declared as institutions of national importance,
enabling them to grant degrees, ushering in uniformity in governance of IIMs with
academic autonomy.
In the year 2023, the Indian Institutes of Management Act, 2017 ( the IIM Act)
was amended to include the National Institute for Training in Industrial Engineering,
Mumbai in the Schedule of the IIM Act under a new name as the Indian Institute of
Management, Mumbai. Presently, there are twenty-one IIMs that are declared as
institutions of national importance and each of those Institutes are specified in the
Schedule to the IIM Act.
2. The Government of India, State Government of Assam and
representatives of United Liberation Front of Assam (ULFA) has signed a
Memorandum of Settlement (MoS) for all-round development of the State of
Assam. As per the MoS, a number of developmental projects are to be
implemented by the Government of India under a Special Development Package
(SDP). Establishment of an IIM at Guwahati as an institution of national
importance is one of the projects under the SDP.
3.The State Government of Assam has requested for establishment of an IIM
in the State of Assam, keeping in view the geographical location of the State and its
all-round development. Assam is one of the very few States with more than three
crore population which does not have an IIM. As per latest published results of the
All-India Survey of Higher Education, more than five and a half lakh students are
enrolled in higher education institutions in Assam. Assam is at the centerstage of all
round development of the region. Establishing an IIM at Assam shall boost the
overall education and development of the region and open up significant
opportunities for the students of North Eastern Region of India to develop
managerial skills.
4.The present Bill, namely the Indian Institutes of Management (Amendment) Bill,
2025, in the light of above, seeks to amend the Indian Institutes of Management Act, 2017.
5. The salient features of the Indian Institutes of Management (Amendment)
Bill, 2025, inter alia, are as under:—
(a)to amend sub-section (1) of section 4 of the IIM Act to provide that
every institute shall be a body corporate by the same name as mentioned in
column (5) of the Schedule;
(b) to insert a new sub-section (1B) in section 4 of the Act to provide
that on and from the date of commencement of the Indian Institutes of
Management (Amendment) Act, 2025, all the provisions of this Act shall
apply to the Indian Institute of Management, Guwahati;
3
4
(c) to insert an new clause (g) in sub-section (1) of section 39 of the Act
to provide that until the first Board of the Indian Institute of Management,
Guwahati is constituted under this Act, all the powers and functions which
may, by or under the provisions of this Act, be exercised or performed by or
on behalf of such Board on commencement of the Indian Institutes of
Management (Amendment) Act, 2025, shall be exercised and performed by
such person or persons as the Central Government may direct in this behalf;
(d) to amend the Schedule to the Act to insert the Indian Institute of
Management, Guwahati in the list of the Institutes, so as to create a new institution,
namely the Indian Institute of Management, Guwahati.
6. The Bill seeks to achieve the above objectives.
NEW DELHI; DHARMENDRA PRADHAN.
The 12th August, 2025.
5
FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM
Clause 2 of the Bill, provides that on and from the date of commencement of
the Indian Institutes of Management (Amendment) Act, 2025, all the provisions of
this Act shall apply to the Indian Institute of Management, Guwahati.
2. The Indian Institute of Management, Guwahati shall be provided corpus
fund of five hundred fifty-five crore rupees for a period of five years (2025-26 to
2029-30). After five years, no additional fund support will be extended to the
Institute since by end of such period, the Indian Institute of Management, Guwahati
shall be generating enough revenue through own internal accruals.
3. In view of the foregoing, the Bill, if enacted, would involve an additional
financial expenditure of five hundred fifty-five crore rupees for a period of five
years, covering both recurring or non-recurring expenses, from and out of the
Consolidated Fund of India.
5
6
MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION
Section 34 of the Indian Institutes of Management Act, 2017 empowers the
Central Government to make rules in respect of certain matters mentioned in the
Act. There is no proposal to amend this section.
2. Section 35 of the Indian Institutes of Management Act, 2017 empowers the
Board of Governors of the Indian Institute of Management, Guwahati to make
regulations not inconsistent with this Act and the rules made thereunder to carry out
the provisions of the Act. The matters in respect of which the regulations may be
made under the aforesaid provisions are matters of detail and it is not practicable to
provide for them in the Bill itself. The delegation of legislative power is, therefore,
of a normal character.
6
ANNEXURE
EXTRACTS FROM THE INDIAN INSTITUTES OF MANAGEMENT ACT, 2017
(33 OF 2017)
* * * * *
4. (1) On and from the commencement of this Act, every existing Institute Incorporation
shall be a body corporate by the same name as mentioned in column (5) of the of Institutes.
Schedule.
* * * * *
39. (1) Notwithstanding anything contained in this Act:—
* * * * *
(f) until the first regulations in relation to National Institute of Industrial
Engineering, Mumbai are made under this Act, the rules and bye-laws of the
National Institute of Industrial Engineering, Mumbai as in force immediately
before the commencement of the Indian Institutes of Management
(Amendment) Act, 2023 shall continue to apply to the National Institute of
23 of 2023.
Industrial Engineering, Mumbai with necessary modifications and adaptations
insofar as they are not inconsistent with the provisions of this Act.
* * * * *
7
LOK SABHA
————
A
BILL
further to amend the Indian Institutes of Management Act, 2017.
————
(Shri Dharmendra Pradhan, Minister of Education)
