—0—
LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF THE STATE OF
GOA
The Goa Panchayat Raj (Amendment)
Bill, 2026
(Bill No. 7 of 2026)
____________
(To be introduced in the Legislative Assembly of the State of Goa)
____________
GOA LEGISLATURE SECRETARIAT
ASSEMBLY HALL, PORVORIM
JANUARY, 2026
—1—
The Goa Panchayat Raj (Amendment)
Bill, 2026
(Bill No. 7 of 2026)
A
BILL
further to amend the Goa Panchayat Raj Act, 1994 (Goa Act No. 14
of 1994).
5 Be it enacted by the Legislative Assembly of Goa in the Seventy-
sixth Year of the Republic of India as follows:—
1. Short title and commencement.— (1) This Act may be called
the Goa Panchayat Raj (Amendment) Act, 2026.
(2) It shall come into force at once except sections 3, 4, 5 and 6
10 which shall be deemed to have come into force on the 12th day of
November, 2025.
2. Insertion of new section 4-A.— After section 4 of the Goa
Panchayat Raj Act, 1994 (Goa Act No. 14 of 1994 (hereinafter
referred to as the “principal Act”), the following section shall be
15 inserted, namely:—
“4-A. Right of member of the Legislative Assembly and
member of the Zilla Panchayat to associate in the meetings of
Gram Sabha.— (1) Notwithstanding anything contained in this Act,
the member of the Legislative Assembly of the State and member of
20 the Zilla Panchayat, representing the Constituency within which a
Panchayat area is encompassed, either wholly or partly, shall have
right to associate in the meetings of Gram Sabha of the concerned
Panchayat and take part in the proceedings of the meetings but shall
have no right to vote unless their names for the time being are
25 entered as electors in the electoral roll of such Panchayat.
(2) The notice of an ordinary meeting of the Gram Sabha shall be
given at least seven clear days before the date of such meeting and in
case of an extraordinary meeting at least four days before the date of
such meeting, by the Sarpanch to the member of the Legislative
30 Assembly and member of the Zilla Panchayat referred in sub-section
—2—
(1), by clearly specifying the date, hour and place at which such
meeting is to be held and the business to be transacted thereto.”
3. Amendment of section 47.— In section 47 of the principal Act,
for the expression “Notwithstanding anything contained in this Act
and the rules framed thereunder, the Secretary shall also exercise the 5
powers on the following matters namely:—”, the expression
"Notwithstanding anything contained in this Act and the rules framed
thereunder, the Secretary shall exercise the powers on the following
matters, namely:—” shall be substituted.
4. Amendment of section 54.— In section 54 of the principal 10
Act,—
(i) in sub-section (1), for the words “fifteen days”, the words
“seven days” shall be substituted;
(ii) in sub-section (2), for the words “within fifteen days”, the
words “within seven days” shall be substituted;
(iii) in sub-section (3), for the words “seven clear days” and 15
“three clear days”, the words “three clear days” and “two clear
days” shall be respectively substituted.
5. Amendment of section 66.— In section 66 of the principal Act,
in sub-section (1), after the existing proviso, the following proviso
shall be inserted, namely:— 20
“Provided further that a building which is reflected in the record of
rights and the first promulgated survey plan prepared under the
provisions of the Goa Land Revenue Code, 1968 (9 of 1969) shall be
deemed to have been erected with due permission of the Panchayat.”.
6. Repeal and savings.— (1) The Goa Panchayat Raj 25
(Amendment) Ordinance, 2025 (Ordinance No. 1 of 2025) is hereby
repealed.
(2) Notwithstanding such repeal, anything done or any action
taken under the principal Act, as amended by the said Ordinance,
shall be deemed to have been done or taken under the principal Act,
as amended by this Act. 30
—3—
STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
The Bill seeks to amend the Goa Panchayat Raj Act 1994 (Goa
Panchayat Raj Act No. 14 of 1994) (hereinafter referred to as the
“said Act”) so as to insert section 4-A to give right to the elected
representatives of the Legislative Assembly and Zilla Panchayat to
attend meetings of the Gram Sabhas of Village Panchayats within
their Constituencies and to take part in their deliberations with right to
vote only if they are members of the Gram Sabha of the concerned
Village Panchayat.
The Bill further seeks to amend section 47 of the said Act so as
to remove the ambiguity due to existence of the word “also” which
gives an interpretation that besides Panchayat Secretary there also
exist another authority to exercise powers under section 47. The
present amendment seeks to remove aforesaid ambiguity and give
clear interpretation that Panchayat Secretary is the sole authority to
exercise powers in respect of the matters mentioned in section 47.
The Bill further seeks to amend section 54 of the said Act to
enable the Village Panchayat to hold four ordinary meetings in a
month by reducing the time period of service of meeting notice.
The Bill further seeks to amend section 66 of the said Act so as
to give protection to the buildings which are reflected in the record of
rights and the first promulgated survey plan prepared under the
provisions of the Goa Land Revenue Code, 1968 (9 of 1969) against
demolition.
The Bill also seeks to repeal the Goa Panchayat Raj
(amendment) Ordinance, 2025 (Ordinance No. 1 of 2025)
promulgated by the Hon’ble Governor of Goa on 12th day of
November, 2025.
This Bill seeks to achieve the above objects.
—4—
FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM
No Financial implications are involved in this Bill.
MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION
No delegated legislation is envisaged in this Bill.
Assembly Hall Shri Mauvin Godinho
Porvorim–Goa Minister for Panchayats
12th January, 2026
Assembly Hall, NAMRATA ULMAN
Porvorim-Goa, Secretary to the Legislative
12th January, 2026 Assembly of Goa
—5—
(Annexure to the Goa Panchayat Raj (Amendment) Bill, 2026
(Bill No. 7 of 2026)
---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
THE GOA PANCHAYAT RAJ ACT, 1994 (ACT 14 OF 1994)
---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
4. Gram Sabha.— As from the date appointed under section 3, all
persons whose names are for the time being entered as electors in the
electoral roll for a Panchayat shall be deemed to constitute the Gram Sabha
for that Panchayat.
—6—
---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
THE GOA PANCHAYAT RAJ ACT, 1994 (ACT 14 OF 1994)
---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
47. Executive powers and functions of the Secretary.—
Notwithstanding anything contained in this Act and the rules framed
thereunder, the Secretary shall also exercise the powers on the following
matters, namely:—
(i) to issue the licences for construction, repairs, modification,
alteration, so also occupancy certificate in pursuance of the resolution of
the Panchayat;
(ii) to issue the permission/license for trade, business, industry, hotel,
restaurant, eating house, coffee house, sweetmeat shop, bakery, boarding
house or lodging house (other than a hostel recognized by the
Government) or a dharmashala or for manufacturing ice or aerated water
or any other permission/license under section 68, 69, 70 or 71 of this Act,
in pursuance of the resolution of the Panchayat;
(iii) upon an order of the Block Development Officer to issue
permission/licence for construction, repairs, modification, alteration, or to
issue permissions license for trade, business, industry, hotel, restaurant,
eating house, coffee house, sweetmeat shop, bakery, boarding house or
lodging house (other than a hostel recognized by the Government) or a
dharmashala or for manufacturing ice or aerated water or any other
permission/license under section 66, 68, 69, 70 or 71 of this Act, or any
occupancy certificate.
(iv) to initiate action for stopping and or demolishing an unauthorized
structure/ building constructed without the permission of the Panchayat
after resolution is passed to that effect;
(v) to execute the resolution passed by the Panchayat body.
—7—
---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
THE GOA PANCHAYAT RAJ ACT, 1994 (ACT 14 OF 1994)
---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
54. Meeting of the Panchayat.— (1) A Panchayat shall meet for
transaction of business at least once in fifteen days at the office of the
Panchayat and at such time as the Sarpanch may determine.
(2) The Sarpanch may, whenever he thinks fit, and shall, upon the written
request of not less than one-third of the total number of members and on a
date within fifteen days from the receipt of such request hold a special
meeting.
(3) Seven clear days notice of an ordinary meeting and three clear days
notice of a special meeting specifying the place, date and time of such
meeting and the business to be transacted thereat, shall be given by the
Secretary of the Panchayat to the members and such officers as the
Government may prescribe, and affixed on the notice board of the
Panchayat.
(4)The officers to whom notice is given under sub-section (3) and other
Government officers having jurisdiction over the Panchayat area or any part
thereof shall be entitled to attend every meeting of the Panchayat and take
part in the proceedings, but shall not be entitled to vote.
(5) If the Sarpanch fails to hold a special meeting as provided in sub-
section (2), the Block Development Officer shall hold such a meeting within
seven days upon the receipt of the written request of not less than one-third
of the total number of members of the Panchayat.
Explanation: For the purpose of this section, the date of presentation of
written request in the office of the Panchayat or the Block Development
Officer, as the case may be shall be the date from which the period is to be
counted.
—8—
---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
THE GOA PANCHAYAT RAJ ACT, 1994 (ACT 14 OF 1994)
---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
66. Regulation of the erection of buildings.— (1) Subject to such rules
as may be prescribed, no person shall erect any building or alter or add to
any existing building or reconstruct any building without the written
permission of the Panchayat. The permission may be granted on payment of
such fees as may be prescribed.
Provided that alteration of a building which consists of a single dwelling
unit constructed or in existence before the commencement of this Act shall
be permitted to the extent of replacement of tiles roofing with the R.C.C.
slab roofing upon production of certificate of stability of such building
issued by the Registered Structural Engineer.
(2) If the Panchayat does not, within a period of fifteen days from the date
of receipt of the application under sub-section (1), determine whether such
permission should be given or not and communicate its decision to the
applicant, after expiry of such period of fifteen days, such permission shall
be deemed to have been granted to the applicant and the applicant shall be
free to execute the work strictly in accordance with the technical clearance
and plans as approved by Town and Country Planning Authorities and in
conformity with conditions laid down by all other statutory authorities but
not so as to contravene any of the provisions of this Act or any rules or bye-
laws made under this Act or of any other law for the time being in force:
Provided that the observations, if any, of the Panchayat in respect of the
application under this section to be complied by the applicant shall be
communicated by the Panchayat to the applicant compulsorily in one single
communication and within a period of seven days from the date of receipt of
such application. The period between the date of dispatch of such
communication by the Panchayat and the date of compliance by the
applicant shall not be considered for calculating such period of fifteen days
specified for the purpose of determination of application by the Panchayat.
(2A) Where the permission under sub-section (1) is deemed to have
been granted under sub-section (2), before proceeding with execution of
the work, the applicant shall give intimation notice in such form as
prescribed, to the Panchayat, the Block Development Officer and the
Town and Country Planning Authorities and he shall also deposit with the
Secretary the fees payable under sub-section (1). The Secretary shall be
—9—
duty bound to accept such fees and issue proper receipt to the applicant
and credit such fees to the Panchayat Fund.
(2B) The applicant after complying with the provisions of sub-section
(2A), shall be entitled to execute the work strictly in accordance with the
technical clearance and plans approved by the Town and Country
Planning Authorities and in conformity with conditions laid down by all
other statutory authorities and the applicant shall follow the procedure as
may be applicable for obtaining the completion certificate within the
validity period.
(2C) Subject to such rules as prescribed, no building erected, re-
erected or altered in pursuance of sub-section (1), (2) or (2B), shall be
occupied in whole or part until an occupancy certificate is issued by the
Panchayat after confirming that such building is in conformity with
approved plans.
(2D) The occupancy certificate shall be issued by Panchayat on
payment of such occupancy fees as prescribed.
(2E) If the Panchayat does not, within a period of fifteen days from the
date of receipt of application for occupancy certificate, determine whether
such occupancy certificate should be issued or not and communicate its
decision to the applicant, after expiry of such period of fifteen days, such
occupancy certificate shall be deemed to have been issued if the applicant
has obtained necessary completion certificate from the Town and Country
Planning Authorities as per the provisions of the Goa (Regulation of Land
Development and Building Construction) Act, 2008 (Goa Act 6 of 2008)
and the Regulations framed thereunder:
Provided that the observations, if any, of the Panchayat in respect of the
application under this section to be complied by the applicant shall be
communicated by the Panchayat to the applicant compulsorily in one single
communication and within a period of seven days from the date of receipt of
such application. The period between the date of dispatch of such
communication by the Panchayat and the date of compliance by the
applicant shall not be considered for calculating such period of fifteen days
specified for the purpose of determination of application by the Panchayat.";
(2F) Where the occupancy certificate is deemed to have been issued
under sub-section (2E), before proceeding to occupy the premises, the
applicant shall give intimation notice in such form as prescribed to the
concerned Panchayat and the Block Development Officer and he shall
also deposit with the Secretary the occupancy fees as payable under sub-
section (2D). The Secretary shall be duty bound to accept the occupancy
—10—
fees and issue a proper receipt to the applicant and credit such fees to the
Panchayat Fund.
(3) Whenever any building is erected, added to or reconstructed without
such permission or in any manner contrary to the rules prescribed under sub-
section (1) or any conditions imposed by the permission granted, the
Panchayat may,—
(a) direct that the building, alteration or addition be stopped; or
(b) by written notice require within a reasonable period to be specified
therein, such building alteration or addition to be altered or demolished.
(4) In the event of non-compliance with terms of any notice under clause
(b) of sub-section (3) within the period specified in the notice, it shall be
lawful for the Panchayat to take such action as may be necessary for the
completion of the act there by required to be done, and all the expenses
therein incurred by the Panchayat shall be paid by the person or persons
upon whom the notice was served and shall be recoverable as if it were a tax
imposed under this Act.
(5) Where the Panchayat fails to demolish the building which is erected,
added to or reconstructed without the permission of the Panchayat, or in any
manner contrary to the rules made under the Act or any conditions imposed
in the permission, within a month from the date of the knowledge, the
Deputy Director shall assume the powers of the Panchayat under sub-
sections (3), (4) and (5) and take such steps as may be necessary for the
demolition of such building.
(6) Notwithstanding anything contained in the foregoing provisions, the
Block Development Officer concerned may, by notice addressed to the
person responsible, stop any construction which is being constructed in
violation of the provisions of the Act or rules or bye-laws made thereunder
and refer the case to the Deputy Director of Panchayat. On receipt of the
notice, such person shall forthwith stop the same.
(7) An appeal shall lie to the Director, within a period of thirty days from
any order of direction or notice issued under any of the provisions of this
section and the decision of the Director on such appeal shall be final.
Explanation:— For the purpose of this section, failure to communicate the
decision by the Panchayat under sub-section (2) and failure to demolish the
building under sub-sections (3) and (4) shall be deemed to be ‘remiss’ in the
performance of duties by the Panchayat.
—11—
____________________________________________________
PRINTED AT THE GOVERNMENT PRINTING PRESS, PANAJI-GOA–1234/100–1/2026.
