23rd FEBRUARY, 2026] ANDHRA PRADESH GAZETTE EXTRAORDINARY 1
Registered No. HSE/49. [Price : Rs.2-00 Paise
пӮҖпҖ«пғ§пҖјпғіпӮҠпғ§пҒјпӮҹпҖјпғ»пҒҳпғҷпҖ пҖ пҒіпӮҗпғҲпҒјпӮҹпғ§пғ”пғЎпҒҘпҒ”пҒ”
THE ANDHRA PRADESH GAZETTE
PART IV-A EXTRAORDINARY
PUBLISHED BY AUTHORITY
No. 8] AMARAVATI, MONDAY, 23rd FEBRUARY, 2026.
ANDHRA PRADESH BILLS
ANDHRA PRADESH LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY
The following Bill was introduced in the Andhra Pradesh
Legislative Assembly on 23rd February, 2026.
L. A. Bill No. 8 of 2026
A BILL TO ENACT THE LAW RELATING TO PRISONS AND PROVIDE
FOR THE SAFE CUSTODY, CORRECTION, REFORMATION AND
REHABILITATION OF PRISONERS AS LAW ABIDING CITIZENS, AND
MANAGEMENT OF PRISONS AND CORRECTIONAL SERVICES IN THE
STATE OF ANDHRA PRADESH AND FOR MATTERS CONNECTED
THEREWITH OR INCIDENTAL THERETO.
Be it enacted by the Legislature of the State of Andhra Pradesh in the
Seventy-Seventh Year of the Republic of India as follows:-
CHAPTER I
PRELIMINARY
1. (1) This Act may be called the Andhra Pradesh Prisons and Short title
extent and
Correctional Services Act, 2026.
Commencement.
(2) It shall extend to the whole of the State of Andhra Pradesh.
(3) It shall come in to force on such date as the State Government
may, by notification in the Andhra Pradesh Gazette, appoint.
[1]
J-5/31
2 ANDHRA PRADESH GAZETTE EXTRAORDINARY [PART IV-A
2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires:
Definitions.
(1) вҖңAfter-care ServiceвҖқ means a service or activity aimed at
the rehabilitation of the released prisoner for enabling him to
lead life as a dutiful citizen.
(2) вҖңCivil PrisonerвҖқ means any prisoner who is not committed to
custody under a writ, warrant or order of any court or authority
exercising criminal jurisdiction, or by the order of a court martial
and who is not a detenue.
(3) вҖңConvictвҖқ means any prisoner under sentence of a court
exercising criminal jurisdiction or court martial.
(4) вҖңCorrectional ServiceвҖқ means any service or program aimed
at the reformation and rehabilitation of an inmate, and includes
services related to the assessment, supervision, treatment,
training, control, custody of an inmate.
(5) вҖңCourtвҖқ includes any officer lawfully exercising civil, criminal
or revenue jurisdiction.
(6) вҖңDirectorateвҖқ means the Directorate of Prisons and
Correctional Services of the State.
(7) вҖңDetenueвҖқ means any person detained in prison on the orders
of a competent authority under any law providing for preventive
detention.
(8) вҖңFamilyвҖқ means Spouse, children, siblings, parents, grand-
parents, grandchildren, and in the context of transgender
inmates, people related through socio-religious family system.
(9) вҖңForeign PrisonerвҖқ means any prisoner who is not a citizen
of India.
(10) вҖңFurloughвҖқ means short leave granted to a convict, after
undergoing a prescribed period of sentence as an incentive
for maintaining good conduct in prison.
(11) вҖңGovernmentвҖқ means the Government of Andhra Pradesh.
(12) вҖңHabitual OffenderвҖқ means a person who, during any
continuous period of five (5) years, whether before or after the
commencement of Andhra Pradesh Habitual Offenders Act,
23rd FEBRUARY, 2026] ANDHRA PRADESH GAZETTE EXTRAORDINARY 3
1962 or partly before and partly after such commencement
has been sentenced on conviction on not less than three
Act No. 4 of 1962.
occasions after he attained the age of eighteen (18) years to
a substantive term of imprisonment for any one or more of the
scheduled offences committed on different occasions and not
so connected together as to form parts of the same
transaction, such sentence not having been reversed in appeal
or on revision:
Provided that in computing the continuous period of five (5)
years referred to above, any period spent in jail either under a
sentence of imprisonment or under detention shall not be taken
into account.
Explanation - An order requiring a person to give security for
Central Act No. 46
good behaviour with reference to section 129 of Bharatiya
of 2023.
Nagarik SurakshaSanhita, 2023 shall be deemed to amount
to a sentence of substantive imprisonment within the meaning
of this clause.
(13) вҖңHead of the Directorate of Prisons and Correctional
ServicesвҖқ means an officer appointed by the Government as
head of the Directorate of Prisons and Correctional Services.
(14) вҖңHigh-risk PrisonerвҖқ means a prisoner with high
propensity towards violence, escape, self-harm, disorderly
behaviour, likely to create unrest in the prison and a threat to
public order and includes those engaged in organised crime
and terrorist activities.
(15) вҖңHigh Security PrisonвҖқ means an independent self
sufficient prison complex with dynamic and strengthened
security systems with provision for an independent Court
complex, etc., to house convicted and under trial inmates, who
need to be kept in a high security custody area, such as
persons involved in terrorist activities, gangsters, dangerous
prisoners, hardened criminals, habitual offenders, prisoners
with high propensity of escape, have the potential of rioting
and negatively influencing other inmates, etc.
(16) вҖңHistory TicketвҖқ means the ticket, either in physical or
electronic form, exhibiting all relevant information in respect
of a prisoner.
4 ANDHRA PRADESH GAZETTE EXTRAORDINARY [PART IV-A
(17) вҖңInmateвҖқ means any person lawfully confined in a prison and
correctional institution.
(18) вҖңInstitutionвҖқ means a place where prisoners are lawfully
confined.
(19) вҖңInstitution for Young OffendersвҖқ means a prison for
young prisoners established to ensure their care, welfare and
rehabilitation, to provide an environment of education and
training conducive to their reformation.
(20) вҖңMedical OfficerвҖқ in relation to prisons means a qualified
Government medical practitioner deputed as a medical officer
of a prison.
(21) вҖңMedical Subordinate StaffвҖқ means a qualified Medical
Assistant, such as Pharmacist, Nurse, Lab Technician, Male
nursing orderly, Female nursing orderly and other paramedical
staff deputed in a Prison to provide medical assistance.
(22) вҖңOpen Prisons / Semi Open PrisonsвҖқ means a place for
confinement of eligible prisoners on such conditions, as may
be prescribed under the rules, for giving them more liberty
outside a regular prison for facilitating their rehabilitation after
release.
(23) вҖңParoleвҖқ means temporary release of a convict for a short
period of time for attending to familial and social obligations.
(24) вҖңPrisonвҖқ means any place used permanently or temporarily
under general or special orders of the Government for the
detention of prisoners and includes all lands and buildings
appurtenant thereto, but does not include -
(a) any place for the confinement of prisoners who are
exclusively in the custody of the police;
Central Act No. 46 (b) any place specially appointed by the Government
of 2023.
under Section 457 of the Bharatiya Nagarik Suraksha Sanhita,
2023;
(c) any place which has been declared by the Government
by a general or special order to be a subsidiary jail.
23rd FEBRUARY, 2026] ANDHRA PRADESH GAZETTE EXTRAORDINARY 5
(25) вҖңPrison OfficerвҖқ means an officer belonging to the
Department of Prisons and Correctional Services and includes
officers of any other security force or any other service
deployed in the prison for assisting the prison administration
for the safe custody of/providing correctional services to the
prisoners.
(26) вҖңPrison StaffвҖҷ means an employee appointed by the
Directorate, other than a prison officer, who exercises powers
or performs duties or functions related to the administration of
this Act or as maybe assigned by the Government.
(27) вҖңPrisonerвҖқ means a person committed to custody in a
prison under the writ, warrant, order or sentence of a Court or
a competent authority and includes convicted prisoner, civil
prisoner, undertrial prisoner, prisoner remanded by a court to
prison custody under the orders of a competent authority and
a detenue.
(28) вҖңProhibited article (contraband)вҖқ means any item that
presents a threat to the safety or security of the prisoners,
prison staff, prison institution or any object, substance, or
material forbidden by the Prisons and Correctional Institutions
or the Government from being in a prisonerвҖҷs possession, like
cell phone, a communication device, drugs or anything that
can be used as a weapon or to aid in escape, such as fire
arms or any of its part, explosives, knives, wire, tools,
chemicals, razor blades, alcohol, matches, lighters or any
article, the introduction or removal of which into or out of a
prison is prohibited by this Act or by therules framed under the
Act or by any other law or by any notification of the Government.
(29) вҖңRecidivistвҖқ means any prisoner who is convicted for a
crime more than once.
(30) вҖңRemissionвҖқ means a concession granted to an eligible
convicted prisoner by the competent authority with the prospect
of early release from prison by shortening of sentence, as may
be prescribed under the rules.
(31) вҖңRuleвҖқ means a rule made under this Act.
(32) вҖңOfficer-in-charge of a PrisonвҖқ means an officer appointed
6 ANDHRA PRADESH GAZETTE EXTRAORDINARY [PART IV-A
by the competent authority as in-charge of a prison, namely
Superintendent, Additional Superintendent and Deputy
Superintendent, etc.
(33) вҖңUndertrial prisonerвҖқ means a person who is not a convict
and has been committed to judicial custody pending
investigation by the police or trial by a court of competent
jurisdiction.
(34) вҖңWireless Communication DeviceвҖқ means a mobile phone,
computer, tablet, laptop, palmtop or any other electronic device
used for unauthorized communication using any cellular or
satellite network or any other device notified by the competent
authority.
(35) вҖңYoung OffenderвҖқ means a prisoner who has attained the
age of eighteen (18) years and has not attained the age of
twenty one (21) years.
CHAPTER - II
FUNCTIONS OF PRISONS AND CORRECTIONAL INSTITUTIONS
3. The functions of Prisons and Correctional Institutions as follows,
namely, -
(1) To keep in safe custody, a prisoner committed to it under any
The functions of
Prisons and
writ, warrant or by the order of any court or any other competent
Correctional
Institutions. authority;
(2) To take suitable measures for the safety and security of
prisoners;
(3) To provide the prisoners with food, clothing, accommodation,
other necessities and medical treatment;
(4) To provide correctional treatment to the prisoners with the
objective of rehabilitating them in the society as law abiding
citizens; and
(5) To maintain discipline in the prison in accordance with the
provisions of this Act and the rules made thereunder.
23rd FEBRUARY, 2026] ANDHRA PRADESH GAZETTE EXTRAORDINARY 7
CHAPTER - III
PRISON ACCOMMODATION
4. The Government shall provide sufficient number of prisons and Accommodation
for prisoners.
correctional institutions in the State of Andhra Pradesh for
accommodating the prisoners, which may be constructed and
maintained in such manner so as to comply with the
requirements of this Act.
5. (1) The pattern of construction of a prison, ground space, air
Prison
architecture
space, ventilation of cells, barracks, bathing places, kitchen,
and institutional
work-sheds, hospitals etc., shall conform to such standards pattern.
and requirements, as maybe prescribed under the rules.
(2) The standards of security for each prison shall be such as may
be prescribed under the rules.
(3) Prisons may be designed in such a manner so as to facilitate
segregation and separate lodging of various categories of
prisoners without any discrimination based on caste, gender
and disability and /or for attending to special needs of prisoners
such as women / transgender/persons with disabilities/
persons suffering from contagious disease or mental illness
or substance abuse/old and infirm prisoners, under trial
prisoners, convicted prisoners, high security prisoners,
habitual/recidivist prisoners, young offenders, civil prisoners,
detenues etc., as may be prescribed under the rules.
(4) The setup of prisons and correctional institutions may include
accommodation and other facilities for the prison officers and
other staff as per functional requirement.
(5) Wherever there is no provision of a stand-alone High Security
Prison in the State, high risk offenders, hardened criminals
and habitual offenders shall be segregated and lodged in
separate barracks or cells of the jail, which shall have a
provision of keeping them away from mingling with other prison
inmates, young offenders, first time offenders etc.
(6) Such separate accommodation as referred to in sub-section(5)
shall have appropriate advanced architecture, design and
8 ANDHRA PRADESH GAZETTE EXTRAORDINARY [PART IV-A
institutional pattern, as prescribed under the rules, for keeping
inmates in a safe and secure custody.
6. (1) The Government may establish various categories of
Categories of
Prisons and
Categories of Prisons and correctional Institutions such as:
Correctional
Institutions
(a) Central Prisons;
(b) District Prisons;
(c) Special Sub Jails;
(d) Sub Jails;
(e) Open Prisons/ Semi Open Prisons;
(f) High Security Prisons;
(g) Special Prisons for Women; and
(h) Institutions for Young Offenders/ Borstal Schools.
(2) The Government may determine the number of prisons and
correctional institutions of any category and the place at which
these may be established.
(3) Each Central Prison/District Prison shall have provision for
a separate ward for high-risk prisoners/hardened criminals/
recidivists/ habitual offenders where they may be lodged
separately in cells without the scope of mingling with the other
inmates so as to protect other prisoners from their negative
influence and radicalized thought process.
(4) Appropriate and advanced security infrastructure and
procedures shall be in place for High-Risk prisoner ward in all
Central/District Prisons. Such prisons shall also have
appropriate provisions for an independent Court complex for
holding court hearing/trials.
Temporary 7. Whenever it appears to the Government that,-
accommodation
for prisoners.
(1) the number of prisoners in a prison is greater than that can
conveniently or safely be kept therein, and it is not convenient
to transfer the excess number to any other prison; or
23rd FEBRUARY, 2026] ANDHRA PRADESH GAZETTE EXTRAORDINARY 9
(2) whenever due to the outbreak of any disease in any prison, or
for any other reason, it is desirable to provide for temporary
shelter and for the safe custody of prisoners, appropriate
provision for temporary prisons may be made, in such manner
as the Government may direct, for the shelter and safe custody
of as many prisoners that cannot be conveniently or safely kept
in a prison.
CHAPTER IV
ORGANIZATIONAL SETUP
8. (1) There shall be a Directorate of Prisons and Correctional
Services in the State which shall be responsible for
Directorate of
implementing the prison policies laid down by the State Prisons and
Correctional
Government, and will plan, organize, direct, coordinate and Services.
control various prisons and correctional services and matters
connected therewith and incidental thereto. The Directorate
shall consist of such number of officers and staff as may be
prescribed by the Government from time to time.
(2) The institutional set up may be decided in accordance with
the need and requirement of accommodating the prisoners,
the inmate population, workload of prison officers and staff
and the workforce may include executive, ministerial, guarding
staff, correctional officers and staff, medical personnel or any
other officer/staff who may be required to assist in executing
the functions explained in sub section (1) and as may be
prescribed under the rules.
9. (1) For the administration of Prisons and Correctional Services,
the Government shall appoint the Head of Prisons & Head of
Prisons and
Correctional Services (of appropriate rank as the Government
correctional
may deem fit), subject to the provisions of the Act and the rules services.
made thereunder.
(2) The Head of Prisons & Correctional Services shall exercise
powers and perform duties under this Act and other officers
and staff of prisons shall work under the general supervision,
control and direction of the Head of Prisons & Correctional
Services.
10 ANDHRA PRADESH GAZETTE EXTRAORDINARY [PART IV-A
(3) The Head of Prisons & Correctional Services shall exercise
such administrative, financial and disciplinary powers as may
be exercised by a Head of Department and such other powers
specifically conferred upon him by the Government from time
to time, as may be prescribed under the rules.
10. (1) The Government may appoint as many officers as may be
necessary to assist the Head of the Directorate of Prisons and
Other Officers
of Prisons. Correctional Services for performing such duties as may be
prescribed under the Act and the rules.
(2) The strength of Prison officers and staff shall be so fixed by
Government in each cadre as shall be permitted on optimum
basis.
(3) For every prison, there shall be an Officer-in-Charge, who may
be a Superintendent, Additional Superintendent, Deputy
Superintendent or any other officer of the Prisons and
Correctional Services, as prescribed under the rules.
(4) The general administrative control and management of prison
unit shall vest with the Officer-in-Charge and other officers
and staff shall exercise or perform such duties and functions
under his direction, as maybe prescribed under the rules and
such administrative and functional control and management
shall be subject to general supervision and control of Director
General of Prisons and Correctional Services.
(5) Salaries and other benefits of officers and staff members may
be commensurate with the work performed in a modern
prisons and correctional system as may be prescribed under
the rules.
11. (1) The qualifications, recruitment, appointment and training of the
Recruitment and
Training. officers and staff of the Prisons shall be such as may be
prescribed under the rules.
(2) Every member of the prison officers and staff in the Prison
shall be provided basic induction training and periodic in-
service training to enable them to perform their duties efficiently
and professionally.
23rd FEBRUARY, 2026] ANDHRA PRADESH GAZETTE EXTRAORDINARY 11
(3) There shall be not less than one training institute to train the
prison officers in different ranks in both induction training and
in-service training programs
CHAPTER-V
DUTIES OF PRISON OFFICERS AND STAFF
12. (1) Subject to the provisions of the Act and the rules made
Functions and
thereunder or under orders and directions of the Head of
Duties of
Prisons and Correctional Services, the Officer-In-Charge of a Officer-In-
Charge.
prison shall manage the prison in all matters including
admission of prisoners, security of the prison, correctional
programs, allowing visitors inside the prison, expenditure,
discipline, punishment and control and release of prisoners,
with the aid and assistance of other subordinate officers and
staff.
(2) The Officer-In-Charge shall be responsible for the proper
upkeep of the prison and all equipments and machinery, etc.
of the prison under his charge.
(3) The Officer-In-Charge shall be responsible for the safe custody
of all documents/records, including records in electronic
format, in his care, and for the money and other articles taken
from prisoners, and perform such other duties and discharge
such other functions as may be prescribed under the rules.
(4) Officer-in-charge of a prison shall exercise such disciplinary
powers as assigned to him under the Act or as prescribed
under the rules for regulation of prisoners, maintaining prison
discipline and proper management of the prison, including
high security Wards.
(5) The Officer-in-Charge shall keep or cause to be kept such
records as may be prescribed by rules.
13. (1) There may be a medical officer for every prison. If the post of
the Medical Officer is vacant, then the medical officer or the Medical Officer
and Medical
doctor in-charge of the Government Hospital or the resident
Staff.
medical officer of the District Civil Hospital may act as the
medical officer of the Sub-Jail or the District or Central Prison,
as the case may be or any medical officer designated by the
12 ANDHRA PRADESH GAZETTE EXTRAORDINARY [PART IV-A
Medical and Health Department may act as medical officer of
Sub-Jail/Special Sub-Jail/District Jail/Central Jail, as the case
may be.
(2) The Medical Officer shall be under the control of the concerned
in-charge of the Jail and the medical officer shall take charge
of the entire medical administration of the institution and every
matter connected to Health Management of Prisoners including
sanitation and hygiene, as prescribed under the rules.
(3) The Medical Officer shall be assisted by the medical
subordinate staff as may be prescribed by rules.
Report on death 14. On the death of any prisoner, the Medical Officer shall forthwith
of a prisoner
record all relevant details and particulars of the case, as may
be prescribed under the rules, and send the report to the Head
of Prisons and Correctional Services through Officer-in-charge
of the prison.
Duties of other 15. All other prison staff shall discharge their duties based on the
prison officers
functions and responsibilities assigned for various categories
and staff.
of prison officers and staff as prescribed under the rules.
Prison officer 16. No prison officer or staff shall be absent from the prison without
not to be absent
leave from the competent authority as may be prescribed in
without leave.
the rules.
Prison officers 17. No prison officer or staff shall have any business dealings with
and staff not to
any prisoner or any relative or friend of a prisoner, directly or
have business
dealings with indirectly, nor shall he have any business dealings with any
prisoners and
prison/jail institution or have any interest, direct or indirect, in
interest in
prison any contract for supply of provisions or any other article to the
contracts.
prison nor shall he derive any benefit, directly or indirectly, from
the sale or purchase of any such provisions or articles. He
shall be bound by the conduct rules of the service as may be
prescribed.
Exercise of 18. All or any of the powers and duties of an Officer-in-Charge or
powers of
a medical officer may, in his absence, be exercised and
Officer-in-
Charge and
performed by such other officer(s), as the competent authority/
Medical Officer
in their Head of Directorate of Prisons may prescribe, either by name
absence.
or by official designation.
23rd FEBRUARY, 2026] ANDHRA PRADESH GAZETTE EXTRAORDINARY 13
19. The Head of Prisons and Correctional Services may establish
Staff Welfare.
a staff welfare wing to aid and advise the Government in the
implementation of welfare measures for prison officers and
staff as may be prescribed in rules.
CHAPTER-VI
USE OF TECHNOLOGY IN PRISON ADMINSITRATION
20. (1) The State shall ensure integration and embedding of
Use of
appropriate technology for the effective management and
Technology in
superintendence of prisons and for the safety and security of prison
administration.
prisons and the prisoners, which may include biometrics,
CCTV system, scanning and detection devices, Radio
Frequency Identification Devices (RFID), Video conference
facilities, video calling facility to the prisoners etc. in every
prison for prisoners to attend Court hearing/trials and to provide
for seamless biometric access control system for movement
of prisoners.
(2) The State shall computerize the entire prison administration
and integrate the data base with the Interoperable Criminal
Justice System. The state shall also develop suitable interfaces
for seamless sharing of information and facilitate the Prison &
Prisoner Management System.
(3) The State may use advanced cellular jamming and cellular
detection solutions in the Jails to prohibit unauthorized use of
cell phones by the prisoners. Latest technological interventions
shall be used to detect and prohibit use of cell phones and
other electronic devices in prisons and its use by prisoners.
(4) The State may use electronic monitoring technology on
prisoners under temporary release/leave from prison, by
making use of prisoner tracking devices.
CHAPTER-VII
ADMISSION, TRANSFER AND DISCHARGE OF PRISONERS
21. (1) The Officer In-Charge of a prison shall receive and detain a
Admission of
Prisoners.
person duly committed to his custody, under this Act or
otherwise, by any Court or any competent authority, according
14 ANDHRA PRADESH GAZETTE EXTRAORDINARY [PART IV-A
to the exigency of any writ, warrant or order by which such
person has been committed to the prison until such person is
discharged or removed in due course of law.
(2) The Officer-In-Charge of a prison shall, after the execution of
such writ, warrant or order or after discharge of the person
committed thereby, return the same to the court by which it
was issued, with a duly signed certificate, showing how the
same has been executed or why the person committed thereby
has been discharged from custody before execution thereof.
(3) The Officer-In-Charge of a prison shall give effect to any
sentence or order or warrant for the detention of any person,
passed or issued by any court or competent authority, under
the provisions of any law for the time being in force.
(4) Where an Officer-In-Charge of a prison doubts the legality of
a warrant or order sent to him for execution, he shall refer the
matter to the Government for confirmation,
(5) Pending a reference made under sub-section (4), the prisoner
shall be detained in such manner and with such restrictions or
mitigations, as maybe specified in the warrant or order.
(6) No person shall be admitted into a prison for detention
otherwise than under the production of a lawful warrant or
under any order of commitment addressed to the Officer-
In-Charge of a prison by a Court or any other competent
authority.
22. (1) Whenever a prisoner is admitted into a prison, he shall be
searched and all cash, jewellery, weapons and prohibited
Prisoners to be
articles or any other article which a prisoner cannot retain with
searched and
examined on him shall be taken from him and retained in safe custody of
admission, exit
and re-entry. the Officer-In- Charge of the prison or an officer authorized by
him.
Provided that a woman prisoner or a transgender prisoner
shall be searched in an appropriate manner as may be
prescribed under the rules.
23rd FEBRUARY, 2026] ANDHRA PRADESH GAZETTE EXTRAORDINARY 15
(2) Every inmate received in a prison shall undergo such physical Central Act No.11
of 2022.
and biometric identification measurements in accordance with
the provisions of the Criminal Procedure (Identification) Act,
2022 and any other law in force.
(3) Every such prisoner shall be examined, on the same day or
not later than 24 hours, by the medical officer, who shall enter
in a record, the health status of the prisoner, including any
illness, present or past, any wounds or marks on his body.
(4) Every prisoner who leaves a prison or re-enters a prison shall
also undergo search and physical and biometric identification
upon each such exit from or entry into Prison.
(5) The search and examination procedure may be such, as may
be prescribed by rules.
23. Any prisoner shall be liable to be searched at any time for
Search of
detection of any prohibited article, etc., as may be prescribed Prisoners.
by rules.
24. All valuable articles of a prisoner, in respect whereof no order
Articles of
Prisoners.
of a competent court has been made, and which, under the
rules may, be brought into a prison by any prisoner or sent to
the prison for the inmateвҖҷs his use, shall be placed in the
custody of the officer authorized by the Officer-In-Charge in
this behalf.
25. (1) Where any person is confined in a prison in the State under a
Transfer of
Prisoner from
sentence of imprisonment or under sentence of death or in
the State to
default of payment of fine or in default of giving security for another State/
UT.
keeping peace or for maintaining good behaviour, the State
Government may, with the mutual consent of the Government
of any other State/UT, by order, provide for the transfer of the
prisoner from that prison to any prison in the other State/UT,
as may be prescribed by rules.
(2) The transfer of any under trial prisoner from the State to another
State/UT, may be done with the consent of the trial Court.
26. (1) The Head of Prisons and Correctional Services shall be
Transfer of a
empowered to transfer a convict prisoner to any other prison convict prisoner
in the State.
in the State, as may be prescribed under the rules.
16 ANDHRA PRADESH GAZETTE EXTRAORDINARY [PART IV-A
27. (1) No Prisoner shall be removed from one prison to another
Removal and
unless the Medical Officer certifies that the prisoner is free
Discharge of
prisoners. from any illness rendering him unfit for removal.
(2) No prisoner shall be discharged against his will from prison, if
labouring from any acute or dangerous distemper, nor until, in
the opinion of the Medical Officer, such discharge is safe.
Central Act No.46 (3) Officer-in-Charge may act as per section 304 of Bharatiya
of 2023.
Nagarik Suraksha Sanhita, 2023 regarding prisoner whose
release orders have been received in local cases and against
whom a production warrant from an outside court has been
received by the Officer- in-Charge.
28. (1) The information of admission of a foreign prisoner in a prison
Admission,
shall be sent forthwith to the Head of the Directorate of Prisons
Transfer and
repatriation of and Correctional Services and forwarded to the Ministry of
foreign prisoners
External Affairs, Government of India, or any other agency as
may be specified by the Central Government as may be
prescribed under the rules.
(2) Transfer of prisoners to outside India and reception to India
Central Act No.49
of 2003.
shall be done as per the Repatriation of Prisoners Act, 2003
and rules framed there under.
CHAPTER-VIII
LIVING CONDITIONS
29. (1) Living conditions in every prison and allied institution meant
Accommodation,
for the custody, care, treatment, reformation and rehabilitation
Food, Clothing &
Bedding of
of offenders shall be compatible with human dignity in all
Prisoners.
aspects such as accommodation, hygiene, sanitation, food,
clothing& bedding and medical facilities without any
discrimination based on caste, gender and disability as
prescribed under the rules.
(2) Every prisoner shall be provided with a sufficient quantity of
wholesome and adequate nutritious food and drink based on
nutritional guidelines prescribed under the rules.
(3) All reasonable steps shall be taken by the Prisons Department
to ensure that environment in prison, the living and working
23rd FEBRUARY, 2026] ANDHRA PRADESH GAZETTE EXTRAORDINARY 17
conditions of prisoner and also of staff members are safe,
healthy and free of practices that undermine a personвҖҷs sense
of personal dignity.
(4) Clothing provided to prisoners shall in no manner be degrading
or humiliating. It shall be suitable, adequate and meet the
requirements of hygiene, climate and shall be made available
as per rules framed under the Act.
30. (1) A civil Prisoner, undertrial prisoner or detenue shall be
Supply of Clothing
permitted to maintain himself, and to purchase or receive from & Bedding to Civil
and undertrial
private resources at proper hours, clothing and bedding or Prisoners/
Detenue.
other necessaries, but subject to examination and to such rules
as may be approved by the Head of the Prisons and
Correctional Services.
(2) Every Civil prisoner/Under-trial prisoner / detenue who is
unable to provide himself with sufficient clothing and bedding
shall be supplied by the Officer-in-charge with such clothing
and bedding as may be necessary as prescribed by rules.
31. (1) The food articles to be purchased for prisoners should be of
Quality of food
articles & Kitchen
good and fit to eat quality. PrisonersвҖҷ Panchayat shall be
Management.
associated with the management of kitchen including receipt
of ration, preparation and distribution of food in every prison
as may be prescribed by rules.
(2) There shall be a separate kitchen for prisoners and separate
dining areas in the prisons to cater to the mess facilities for
prison inmates as may be prescribed by rules.
(3) No part of any food, clothing, bedding or other necessaries
belonging to any civil or un-convicted criminal prisoner or
detenue shall be given, hired or sold to any other prisoner;
and any prisoner transgressing the provisions of this section
shall lose the privilege of purchasing food or receiving it from
private sources, for such time as may be prescribed by rules.
CHAPTER-IX
CLASSIFICATION OF PRISONERS
32. A Committee shall be constituted for classification and security
Composition of
assessment of prisoners, comprising officers of the Prisons 32 Classification
and Security
and Correctional Services and other officers, as may be Assessment
Committee.
prescribed under the rules.
18 ANDHRA PRADESH GAZETTE EXTRAORDINARY [PART IV-A
33. (1) The Classification and Security Assessment Committee may
Grounds of
classify the persons admitted into a prison according to their
Classification and
Categories.
age, gender, physical and mental health needs, safety and
security requirements, crime gravity, length of sentence,
security needs, aptitude, and needs regarding reintegration
into the community and shall constitute groups among them
for the purpose of administration of institutional treatment in
the form of educational and vocational training during the period
of detention.
(2) The prisoners may be classified under the following broad
categories, -
(a) Civil Prisoners;
(b) Criminal Prisoners;
(c) Convicted prisoners;
(d) Undertrial prisoners;
(e) Detenues;
(f) Habitual Offenders;
(g) Recidivists.
(3) The prisoners classified into different categories in sub-section
(2) maybe lodged in separate barracks / enclosures / cells
with a view to protect other prisoners from negative influence
and radicalized thought process of the hardened / habitual /
high risk prisoners.
(4) The prisoners may also be segregated gender-wise - male,
female and transgender and lodged separately.
(5) The prisoners classified in sub-section (2) maybe further
classified under the following sub-categories and lodged
separately:
(a) Drug addicts and alcoholic offenders;
(b) First time offenders;
(c) Foreign prisoners;
(d) Old and infirm prisoners (65+ years);
(e) Prisoners suffering from infectious/chronic diseases;
23rd FEBRUARY, 2026] ANDHRA PRADESH GAZETTE EXTRAORDINARY 19
(f) Prisoners suffering from mental illness;
(g) Prisoners sentenced to death;
(h) High risk prisoners;
(i) Prisoners with children;
(j) Young Offenders;
(k) Any other category as may be prescribed by rules.
(6) Dangerous and high-risk prisoners shall be accommodated
in special cells or high security prisons.
(7) The Officer-in-charge shall take special care and caution for
ensuring safe and secure custody of high-risk prisoners, as
may be specified by the Government in this behalf.
(8) The Officer-In-Charge shall take special care and caution for
safe custody of prisoners who are sentenced to death, as may
be prescribed by rules.
CHAPTER-X
PROTECTION OF SOCIETY FROM CRIMINAL ACTIVITIES OF HIGH
RISK PRISONERS, HABITUAL OFFENDERS AND
HARDENED CRIMINALS
34. (1) It shall be the responsibility of the Department of Prisons and
Taking appropriate
Correctional Services and the Police Department of the State measures against
criminal activities
to take all appropriate measures for protecting the society from of prisoners.
the criminal activities of high-risk prisoners, habitual offenders
and hardened criminals.
(2) Based on the details of the crime committed by the prisoners,
available background record, history ticket, etc., prisoners shall
be suitably classified, assessed for their propensity and
potential to negatively influence other prisoners and may be
housed in separate barracks/cells, as may be appropriate and
as prescribed by rules.
(3) With a view to protecting the society and the victims, high risk
prisoners, hardened criminals and habitual offenders shall not
be entitled for parole, furlough, or any kind of prison leave in
the normal course as may be prescribed by rules.
20 ANDHRA PRADESH GAZETTE EXTRAORDINARY [PART IV-A
35. (1) Prisons and Correctional Institutions shall ensure special watch
Special
provisions for and surveillance on such inmates for preventing organized
security,
crime and continued criminal activities while imprisoned,
intelligence
gathering, including gang activity, intimidating witnesses etc.
surveillance and
rotation of prison
(2) For ensuring static and dynamic security, preventing escapes,
staff on duty.
instances of disorder and criminal activity in prisons,
appropriate provision for intelligence gathering from prisoners,
careful observation, monitoring of prisoners and analysis of
the relevant information may be done by the Department of
Prisons and Correctional Services in coordination with the
Intelligence Wing of the State Police Department.
(3) The State Government shall ensure strengthened and effective
measures for periodic search and detection of contrabands,
cell phones, etc., in the cells and barracks of high-risk
offenders and hardened criminals and deploy advanced
jamming solutions in such areas, including conduct of frequent
surprise checks as prescribed by rules.
(4) The prison and other security staff deployed in such sensitive
barracks and cells shall be rotated at periodic intervals to
prevent any nexus and complacency in security.
(5) The release of a High-risk/Hardened/Habitual offender/ convict
on completion of sentence or an under trial on bail or an inmate
released temporarily on parole/furlough, etc., shall be informed
to the Superintendent of Police of the concerned district, who
shall keep a watch on the activities of such prisoners.
(6) The District Administration shall fully secure the movement of
the prisoner, in course of movement to court for judicial
proceeding, to the hospital for medical treatment or any other
place, as per writ, warrant, or order of the competent authority,
as the case may be.
CHAPTER-XI
CUSTODY AND SECURITY OF PRISONERS
36. (1) The Officer-In-Charge of the prison shall be responsible to
Safe custody
and security of undertake effective measures for ensuring safe custody and
prisoners.
security of prisoners as may be prescribed in the rules. These
23rd FEBRUARY, 2026] ANDHRA PRADESH GAZETTE EXTRAORDINARY 21
measures may not be limited to but may include the following:
Secure walls, building gates, good lighting system, central
point monitoring of prisoners, watch towers, power fencing,
control of prohibited articles, system for gathering
intelligence information, closed circuit televisions and other
advanced gadgets and devices for guarding purposes and
preventing access to prohibited articles in prisons etc,.
(2) On the request of the Officer In Charge, the local police
authorities shall provide necessary assistance to the prison
authorities, for escorting a prisoner to a court or for visit to
hospital or for custody parole, etc., and for ensuring the safe
custody of any prisoner who poses a special risk, including
escape from prison, rioting, arson resorting to any violent
means affecting the law and order and discipline in the prison.
37. (1) The Officer-in-charge of the prison shall cause to ensure that
Security
every prisoner is assigned a security classification that reflects classification.
level of risk posed by him, including the risk of escape and the
risk that escape would pose to the public in general or some
persons. The security classification shall be done as per the
procedure as may be prescribed by rules.
(2) The level of security necessary shall be reviewed at regular
intervals throughout the prisonerвҖҷs confinement as may be
prescribed by rules.
(3) The police authorities shall send the antecedents of every
prisoner admitted to the prisons in the prescribed form.
38. The manner of use of restraint and force on prisoners may be
Use of arms and
regulated as prescribed under the rules. force.
CHAPTER-XII
PRISON REGIMEN FOR WOMEN PRISONERS
39. (1) The Government may establish such number of exclusive
prisons for women prisoners as it may consider necessary,to Separate
accommodation
accommodate women prisoners. In a prison housing both for Women
Prisoners.
women and men prisoners, women prisoners shall be kept in
a separate building or a separate part of the same building,
with a separate entrance, in such a manner that they do not
22 ANDHRA PRADESH GAZETTE EXTRAORDINARY [PART IV-A
come into contact with men prisoners. All basic facilities as
provided in the prison for men may also be provided to women
prisoners, along with such other facilities that meet their gender
specific needs.
(2) A separate female ward in the prison hospital maybe created
for women prisoners.
(3) In case of exclusive women prison and women enclosure/
female ward, only women prison officials and staff shall be
deputed. Male prison officials and security staff can be
deployed for duties outside such prison or enclosure and can
be called inside by the Officer-in-charge or the officer on duty,
only in case of any situation of emergency or prison offence,
as may be prescribed under the rules.
(4) Women prisoners may be provided access to correctional
programs and activities which take into account their gender
specific needs.
40. (1) When a woman prisoner is found to be pregnant at the time of
Pregnant/
postpartum/ admission or later, the medical officer shall report the fact to
lactating women
the Officer-in-Charge. Necessary arrangements shall be made
prisoners.
for providing her medical care and diet as may be prescribed
under the rules.
(2) The Postpartum/lactating women prisoners shall be provided
such medical care and diet as necessary, as prescribed under
the rules.
41. Any complaint or information of sexual harassment of a woman
Inquiry into
complaints of prisoner shall be acted upon without delay as per the provisions
sexual
of law. The enquiry report shall be sent to such authority as
harassment.
may be prescribed by rules.
CHAPTER-XIII
PRISONERS WITH CHILDREN
42. (1) Male Prisoners may keep their male children and Female
Prisoners with
children.
Prisoners may keep their male and female children inside the
prison until the child attains the age of six (6) years.
(2) A child living with his father/mother in a prison may be provided
with health care and such other facilities, as may be prescribed
23rd FEBRUARY, 2026] ANDHRA PRADESH GAZETTE EXTRAORDINARY 23
under the rules.
(3) Specialized programs for the children whose mother/ father is
confined in prisons and crossed six years of age and requires
such programs may be taken up.
CHAPTER-XIV
TRANSGENDER PRISONERS
43. (1) Separate enclosures/wards for transgender prisoners, both
Prison Regimen
transmen and transwomen, may be provided, as prescribed for Transgender
Prisoners
under the rules.
(2) Transgender prisoners may be provided access to any specific
health-care or psycho-social needs as may be required.
(3) Transgender prisoner may be provided access to correctional
programs and activities.
CHAPTER -XV
PRISONERS CONTACT WITH OUTSIDE WORLD
44. (1) Prisoners may communicate with their Visitors, namely family Visit to
Prisoners.
members, relatives and friends through physical or virtual
mode, under proper supervision of prison authorities. Visitors
to prisoners shall be verified / authenticated through biometric
/ iris verification/identification or any specific technology, tool
and verification process shall be such as prescribed by rules.
(2) The name, address, photograph and biometric identification
of each visitor to the prisoner shall be entered into record as
prescribed under the rules.
(3) Foreign prisoners may communicate with their family members
and consular representatives, as prescribed under the rules.
(4) Prisoners may communicate with their legal counsel, as
prescribed under the rules.
45. (1) All visitors to prisoners shall be searched in a manner as
Search of
prescribed under the rules. visitors and
prison officers
and staff
(2) In case any visitor refuses to get himself searched, he shall be
denied admission to the prison and such decision shall be
24 ANDHRA PRADESH GAZETTE EXTRAORDINARY [PART IV-A
entered into record.
(3) Appropriate provisions for search of visitors who are women,
transgender or persons with disabilities may be made, as
prescribed under the rules.
(4) All prison officers and staff shall be searched, upon each entry
to the prison and each exit from the prison.
CH APT ER-XVI
DISCIPLINE IN PRISONS
46. (1) The Officer-in-charge shall have the necessary authority and
Discipline in
will be responsible for maintaining discipline in the prison and
Prisons.
amongst the prisoners, prison officers and staff, in accordance
with the provisions of this Act and rules made there under.
(2) The manner of enforcing discipline in the prisons shall be such
as may be prescribed under the rules.
(3) It shall be the duty of every prisoner to obey the orders and
instructions of a prison officer and to abide by the provisions
of this Act and to comply with such other directions as may be
prescribed under the rules.
Prisons 47. The following acts are declared as prison offences, when committed
Offences.
by a prisoner, namely,-
(a) Willful disobedience of any rule or regulation of the prison, as
prescribed under this Act or under the rules made thereunder;
(b) Any assault or use of force on anyone;
(c) Deliberate and persistent use of insulting or threatening
language;
(d) Immoral or indecent or disorderly behaviour;
(e) Willfully disabling himself from labour;
(f) Continuously refusing to work if the prisoner has been punished
with rigorous imprisonment;
(g) Willful idleness or negligence at work by any convict prisoner
sentenced to rigorous imprisonment;
23rd FEBRUARY, 2026] ANDHRA PRADESH GAZETTE EXTRAORDINARY 25
(h) Willful mismanagement of work by any convict prisoner
sentenced to rigorous imprisonment;
(i) Willful damage to prison property;
(j) Tampering with or defecting history tickets, records or
documents maintained in physical or electronic form;
(k) Receiving, possessing or transferring any prohibited article;
(l) Willfully making a false accusation against any prison official;
(m) Omitting or refusing to report, as soon as it comes to his
knowledge, the occurrence of any fire, any plot or conspiracy,
any attempt to escape or preparation to escape or attack on
any prisoner or any other person or prison official;
(n) Escape or attempt to escape, conspiring to escape, or to
assist in escaping;
(o) Unauthorized use or possession of wireless communication
devices and /or their ancillary components;
(p) Trespassing in or loitering about in the prison premises where
entry may not be allowed;
(q) Unauthorized communication with any person outside prison;
(r) Pretending to be a prison official or employee of the
Department;
(s) Smuggling or attempting to smuggle or to have in possession
any prohibited article in the prison;
(t) Intimidating fellow prisoner(s) into making false representation
against the prison officials;
(u) Participating in or inciting mass hunger strike or any other act
of defiance or indiscipline;
(v) Sexual harassment or sodomy;
(w) Participating in, or organizing any anti-social activities as
prescribed by rules;
(x) Aiding or abetting the commission of any aforesaid offences;
(y) Such other offences as prescribed in the rules from time to
time.
48. The Officer-in-charge, after conducting an inquiry as prescribed
Punishment for
prison offences.
under this Act and the rules made thereunder, may impose any
26 ANDHRA PRADESH GAZETTE EXTRAORDINARY [PART IV-A
of the following punishments with respect to the prison offences
Central Act No.45
of 2023. indicated in section 47, except in such case which constitute
an offence under the Bharatiya Nyaya Sanhita, 2023 or any
other special or/and local laws.
(1) A formal warning, which means a warning personally
addressed to a prisoner by the Officer-in-charge and recorded
in the punishment book and in the prisonerвҖҷs history ticket;
(2) Stoppage of recreational facilities, including canteen facility,
up to a period of one month;
(3) Forfeiture of remission earned for a period up to three (3)
months;
(4) Stopping visits of all visitors (including virtual) and telephone
facility for a period of not more than one month (does not include
the visit of an advocate);
(5) Separate confinement for a period not exceeding one month;
(6) Any other punishment prescribed in the rules from time to time.
Punishment for 49. (1) Prison inmates are forbidden from possessing or using mobile
possessing or
phones and other electronic communication devices in prisons.
using mobile
phones and other
Whoever, being a prisoner or a visitor or a prison official, in
contraband.
contravention of any provisions of the Act or rules made
thereunder, is found possessing or using such devices or
introduces or removes or attempts by any means whatsoever,
to introduce or remove into or from any prison or supplies or
attempts to supply to any prisoner, any prohibited article, and
every officer or staff of a prison who, contrary to any such rule,
knowingly allows any such article to be introduced into or
removed from any prison, to be possessed by any prisoner or
to be supplied to any prisoner and whoever, contrary to any
such rule, communicates or attempts to communicate with any
prisoner, and whoever abets any offence made punishable by
this section, shall, on conviction before a Magistrate, be liable
to imprisonment for term not exceeding three (3) years, or fine
not exceeding twenty five thousand rupees, or both.
(2) Whoever, being a prisoner or a visitor, or a prison official, is
found in possession of, or operating or using an electronic
23rd FEBRUARY, 2026] ANDHRA PRADESH GAZETTE EXTRAORDINARY 27
device or a wireless communication device or any of its
ancillaries or components, or if any such person is found to be
assisting or abetting or instigating in the supply thereof, or if
any such person is found to be manipulating, damaging or
destroying any equipment in the prison, electronic or otherwise,
shall on conviction before a Magistrate, be liable to
imprisonment for a minimum period of two years which may
extend to three (3) years or with fine not exceeding twenty five
thousand rupees or with both.
(3) The prisoner shall undergo the sentence awarded under sub-
section (1) or sub-section (2) on completion of any sentence if
already undergoing.
(4) The offences mentioned in sub-section (1) and (2), shall be
cognizable and non-bailable.
50. If any person in the prison premises is guilty of an offence Procedure on
repeated
against prison discipline, which by reason of his having
committal of a
prison offence.
frequently committed such offence or otherwise, in the opinion
of the Officer-in-charge, is not adequately punishable by the
infliction of any punishment which he has the power to inflict
under this Act, the Officer-in-charge shall forward the case of
such prisoner to the competent Magistrate having jurisdiction,
together with a statement of the circumstances, and such
Magistrate shall thereupon try the charge so brought against
the prisoner, and upon conviction, may sentence him to
imprisonment which may extend for a period up to three (3)
years. Such term shall be in addition to any other term which
such prisoner may be already undergoing.
51. The Officer-in-Charge may cause to be affixed, at a Display of prison
offences and
conspicuous place inside the prison, a notice in English and
penalties.
in the vernacular language, setting forth the acts prohibited
under this Act and the penalties incurred by their commission,
for the information of the prisonersвҖҷ and prison staff.
CHAPTER-XVII
HEALTH CARE FACILITIES
52. All prisoners will have access to adequate, gender-responsive PrisonersвҖҷ health
care.
health care facilities as may be prescribed under the rules.
28 ANDHRA PRADESH GAZETTE EXTRAORDINARY [PART IV-A
Hospital. 53. In every Central Prison, District prison and Special Prison for
Women, a hospital with well-equipped testing laboratory and
proper place for the reception of sick prisoners shall be
provided with adequate infrastructural facilities including
medical officer and medical subordinate staff. There shall also
be an ambulance readily available to shift sick prisoners in
emergency.
54. There shall be a de-addiction centre in every Central Prison,
De-addiction.
District Prison and Special Prison for Women with a view to
provide cure for addiction to substance abuse and to provide
counselling and treatment programs.
55. (1) The Government may, by a general or special order, direct the
Mental Health
Psychological transfer of any prisoner with mental illness from the place of
assessment and
detention to any mental health establishment in the State with
treatment.
prior permission of the Board mentioned in Section 103 of the
Central Act No. 10
Mental Healthcare Act, 2017.
of 2017
(2) The method, modalities and procedure by which transfer of a
prisoner under this section is to be effected shall be such as
may be prescribed under the rules.
CHAPTER-XVIII
WELFARE PROGRAMS FOR PRISONERS
Vocational 56. (1) The Prisoners shall be provided appropriate opportunity for
Training, Skill
enhancing their educational qualification, including making
Development,
Education and provision for library facilities in a prison, as may be prescribed
Recreation
under the rules.
facilities.
(2) Vocational training and skill development programs shall be
provided to prisoners as part of prison correctional programs.
These programs may be diverse in nature to facilitate
rehabilitation of the prisoners, as prescribed under the rules.
(3) The Officer-in-charge shall organize spiritual, cultural, and
recreational programs, etc., for the prisoners, as may be
prescribed under the rules.
(4) The Officer-in-charge shall ascertain the State/Central
Government welfare programs/schemes which are in vogue
and made applicable to the prisoners.
23rd FEBRUARY, 2026] ANDHRA PRADESH GAZETTE EXTRAORDINARY 29
(5) A prisoner welfare fund with contribution made by the State
Government shall be set up to cater the correctional programs
and after care needs of prisoners.
(6) Any other program which caters to the rehabilitation of the
prisoners may be taken as prescribed under the rules.
57. Canteens and Sales Outlets may be established in a prison for the
Establishment of
Canteen and
sale of products, including jail products to the prisoners, prison staff
Sales Outlets.
and the public, and this includes sale of products on e-commerce
platform and all such canteens and sales outlets etc., shall be
operationalized as may be prescribed under the rules.
CHAPTER-XIX
SENTENCE PLANNING
58. (1) A sentence plan setting out the program of treatment may be Individual
Sentence
prepared by the Officer-in-charge, which will help in the
Planning.
prisonersвҖҷ reformation, rehabilitation and social reintegration,
as may be prescribed under the rules.
(2) The individual sentence plans may be updated and recorded
in the prisoner files on periodic basis.
(3) Prison work programs and vocational training may be
integrated with National/State welfare and developmental
schemes by including prisoners as priority target group of
beneficiaries.
59. (1) Every prisoner, including undertrial prisoner or civil prisoner Work program
and wages.
or prisoner sentenced to simple imprisonment, while in
custody, may be provided the opportunity of work without any
discrimination based on caste, if available, and be paid
commensurate wages, as prescribed under the rules.
(2) The record of wage earned and spent by any prisoner shall be
maintained by the Officer-in-charge as prescribed under the
rules.
30 ANDHRA PRADESH GAZETTE EXTRAORDINARY [PART IV-A
CHAPTER-XX
PRISON INDUSTRIES
Establishment
60. (1) Prison industries shall be modernized in tune with the demand
and
Modernization of labour market and necessary skills to that effect shall be
of Prison
industries. imparted to the prisoners.
(2) The prison products shall be oriented in a manner that is driven
by the market.
(3) The prison industries shall be designed in such a way to
provide real time experience to the inmates.
(4) For modernization of prison industries Public-Private
Partnership/Public -Public Partnership/CSR funds modes shall
be adopted.
(5) Concerned faculty/instructors shall be appointed for prison
industries.
CHAPTER-XXI
OPEN AND SEMI OPEN CORRECTIONAL INSTITUTIONS
open and semi 61. (1) The State Government shall establish and maintain as many
open
correctional open and semi open correctional institutions for the prisoners
institutions
as may be required.
(2) The State Government shall allow such facilities or concessions
in such open or semi open correctional institutions which may
assist the prisoner in his rehabilitation into the society, as may
be prescribed under the rules.
(3) The rules for management of open or semi open correctional
institutions, including the procedure and eligibility of prisoners
who can be transferred to such correctional institutions, dealing
with prisoners who violate any condition of transfer to an open
or semi open correctional institutions, etc., shall be such as
may be prescribed by the Government.
CHAPTER-XXII
PRISON LEAVE, REMISSION AND PRE - MATURE RELEASE
62. (1) Prison leave shall be granted to eligible convicted prisonersвҖҷ
Parole and
Furlough. as an incentive for good behaviour and responsiveness to
correctional treatment with the objective of their rehabilitation,
23rd FEBRUARY, 2026] ANDHRA PRADESH GAZETTE EXTRAORDINARY 31
as may be prescribed under the rules. ..
(2) There shall be the following types of prison leave, namely-
(a) Regular Parole;
(b) Emergency Parole;
(c) Furlough.
(3) Regular Parole may be granted to eligible convicts by the
competent authority under such conditions and for such
purposes as may be prescribed under the rules. The period
spent on regular parole may not exceed thirty days at a time
and may not be granted more than two times in a year. The
period spent on regular parole shall not be counted as part of
sentence.
(4) Emergency Parole may be granted by the competent authority
to eligible convicts in rare or emergent situations, under police
protection for a period extending up to 48 hours, as prescribed
under the rules. The period spent under this parole shall
becounted towards part of sentence.
(5) Furlough may be granted to eligible convicts by the competent
authority for a period not more than fourteen (14) days as an
incentive for maintaining good conduct and discipline in the
prison under such conditions and for such purpose as may be
prescribed under the rules. The period spent on furlough shall
be counted as part of sentence served by the prisoner.
(6) For prisoners governed by any of the laws relating to the Armed
Forces of the Union, the grant of leave shall be subject to the
provisions of those laws.
(7) If a prisoner on parole or furlough fails to surrender on the due
date upon intimation by the Officer-in-charge of the prison, the
police shall arrest the prisoner under provisions of section 262
Central Act
of Bharatiya Nyaya Sanhita, 2023 and take action as per the No.45 of 2023.
provisions of law.
(8) Violation of parole/furlough conditions shall attract prison
punishment as prescribed by rules.
32 ANDHRA PRADESH GAZETTE EXTRAORDINARY [PART IV-A
Use of electronic 63. For public safety and preventing parole jumping, prisoners may
tracking device
be granted prison leave on the condition of their willingness to
on prisoners.
wear electronic tracking devices for monitoring the movement
and activity of such prisoners. Any violation by the prisoner
shall attract cancellation of prison leave, in addition to
disqualification from any prison leave being granted in future,
as may be prescribed under the Rules.
Remission to 64. (1) Subject to the overall good behaviour and conduct of a
prisoners.
convicted prisoner while serving the sentence, remission may
be granted by the competent authority, as may be prescribed
under the rules.
(2) The period and criteria of granting remission shall be such as
may be prescribed under the rules.
65. Pre-mature release shall be allowed to a prisoner by the
Pre-mature
release. competent authority with the objective of his rehabilitation and
reintegration into the society. The Government may constitute
a Sentence Review Board for considering and recommending
Central Act
cases for premature release of convicted prisoner in
No.46 of 2023.
appropriate cases under the provisions of the Bharatiya
Nagarik Suraksha Sanhita, 2023, as prescribed under the
rules.
CHAPTER -XXIII
BOARD OF VISITORS
Board of 66. The State Government shall, by notification, constitute a Board
Visitors.
of Visitors comprising Official and Non-official members. The
task of the Board of Visitors shall include:-
(1) Monitoring correctional work, with special attention to the
degree and quality of the effectiveness of infrastructure/
facilities in the prisons.
(2) Suggesting new avenues leading to improvement in
correctional work.
(3) Going into individual or collective grievances of inmates and
providing redressal in consultation with the prison authorities
23rd FEBRUARY, 2026] ANDHRA PRADESH GAZETTE EXTRAORDINARY 33
CHAPTER-XXIV
INSPECTION OF PRISONS
67. (1) Inspection conducted by senior prison officers - The Head of
Inspection of
Prisons and Correctional Services shall have a prison
Prisons.
inspected by an officer of appropriate rank at periodic intervals,
as may be prescribed under the rules; and
(2) Every inspection shall be followed by a written report to the
Officer-in-charge of the Prison and to the Head of the
Directorate of Prisons and Correctional Services.
CHAPTER-XXV
AFTER-CARE AND REHABILITATION SERVICES.
68. (1) The Government may endeavour to provide after-care services After-care and
Rehabilitation
to all needy prisoners released from a prison with a view to
Services.
ensuring their reformation, rehabilitation and reintegration into
the society by involving Non- Government Organizations as
prescribed under the rules.
(2) Rehabilitation society shall be established to provide aftercare
services to the released prisoners.
CHAPTER-XXVI
MISCELLANEOUS
69. The Government may provide the facility of free legal aid to Legal Aid.
the prisoners in accordance with the provisions of the вҖңLegal
Services Authorities Act, 1987вҖқ and the Standard Operating
Central Act No.
of 39 of 1987
Procedure prescribed by National Legal Services Authority/
State Legal Services Authority/District Legal Services Authority
or as may be prescribed under the rules.
70. (1) There shall be an Under Trial Review Committee for every
Constitution of
under Trial
district, headed by the District and Sessions Judge, and
Review
comprising of such other members and for carrying out such Committee for
every district.
functions, as may be prescribed under the rules.
(2) The committee shall meet periodically and review the cases
of eligible prisoners in all prisons of the district, and make
appropriate recommendations.
34 ANDHRA PRADESH GAZETTE EXTRAORDINARY [PART IV-A
Information on 71. On admission, all prisoners shall be informed of disciplinary
disciplinary
requirements in the prison and their rights and duties in
requirements in
the prison.
language comprehensible to them. Such information shall also
be displayed at a place accessible to prisoners.
Grievance 72. There may be appropriate mechanism for redressal of the
Redressal
Mechanism. grievances of the prisoners and prison staff, as may be
prescribed under the rules.
Utilization of 73. The Officer-in-charge may utilize the services of prisoners
the services
of Prisoners. without any discrimination based on caste in accordance with
the rules for efficient management of the prison and such
prisoner shall not be deemed to be a вҖңPublic servantвҖқ within
Central Act
45 of 2023 the meaning of section 2(28) of Bharatiya Nyaya Sanhita,
2023. However, prisoners shall not be used for maintenance
of any prison records.
74. No prisoner, visitor or any person employed in the prison, shall
Prohibition of
strike and have any right to strike or start or continue any agitation inside
agitation.
the prison for achieving any request or demand.
Emergency. 75. The officer-in-charge shall, as may be prescribed under the
rules, take all appropriate measures, including the
procurement of necessary equipments and preparation of a
Central Act 53 contingency plan, for preventing and controlling any emergency
2005.
situation in the prison, including ensuring availability of Quick
Reaction Team, etc., and any other provision in conformity with
the Disaster Management Act, 2005 or any other relevant Act
and orders or instructions issued by any competent authority.
76. A prisoner, when being taken to or from any prison, in which
Extramural
Custody, he may be lawfully confined, or to a court for production or to a
Control and
hospital for medical treatment, or whenever he is working
employment of
prisoners. outside or is otherwise beyond the limits of any such prison in
or under the lawful custody or control of a prison officer
belonging to such prison, or any other officer deployed for such
duty, shall be deemed to be in prison and shall be subject to
all directions and discipline, as if he were actually in prison.
Prisoners 77. The Prisons Development Board constituted under section 3
Welfare and
Staff welfare. of the Andhra Pradesh Prisons Development Board Act, 2001
shall in addition to the functions assigned to it under the said
Act No. 12
of 2001
Act, also have functions of modernizing prison infrastructure
23rd FEBRUARY, 2026] ANDHRA PRADESH GAZETTE EXTRAORDINARY 35
and facilities for better prison management, correctional and
reformational activities for prisoners and welfare of the prison
staff and any other under the provisions of this Act, as may be
prescribed.
78. (1) The State Government shall create a fund called Corpus Fund Prisons
Department
and allocate funds for running of prison industries without Corpus Fund
reliance on the Government for budgetary support.
(2) The fund allocation, its modalities and manner of operation
shall be such as may be prescribed under the rules.
79. Any of the powers conferred by this Act may be exercised and Delegation of
Powers.
performed by such officers as the Government may designate
in this regard.
80. The accounts of every prison shall be maintained and audited
Accounts and
in such manner as may be prescribed by the Government. Audit.
81. No suit, prosecution or other legal proceeding shall lie against
Protection of
action taken in
the Government or any functionary of the Government in respect
good faith.
of anything which is done or intended to be done in good faith
in pursuance of this Act or the rules made or orders or
directions issued thereunder.
82. (1) The Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette,
Power to make
rules.
make rules consistent with this Act.
(2) Every rule made under this Act, shall immediately after it is
made, be laid before the State Legislature if it is in session,
and if it is not in session, in the session immediately following
for a total period of fourteen (14) days which may be comprised
in one session or in two successive sessions, and if, before
the expiration of the session in which it is so laid or the session
immediately following, the legislature agree in making any
modifications in the rule or in the annulment of the rule, the rule
shall, with effect from the date of notification of such
modification of annulment in the Andhra Pradesh Gazette is
notified have effect only in such modify from or shall stand
annulled, as the case may be so however that any such
modification or annulment shall be without prejudice to the
validity of anything previously done under that rule.
36 ANDHRA PRADESH GAZETTE EXTRAORDINARY [PART IV-A
Repeal and 83. (1) The Prisons Act, 1894, The Prisoners Act, 1900 and Transfer
saving.
of Prisoners Act, 1950 as applicable to the State of Andhra
Central Act
Pradesh are hereby repealed.
No. 9 of 1894
(2) Notwithstanding this Act, all the rules, regulations, orders,
Central Act
No. 29 of 1950
directions, notifications relating to prisons made under these
Acts and in force immediately before the commencement of
this Act shall, except where and so far, as they are inconsistent
with or repugnant to the provisions of this Act, continue to be
in force until altered, amended or repealed by rules made under
this Act.
Powers to 84. (1) If any difficulty arises in giving effect to any of the provisions of
remove
difficulties. this Act, the Government may, by order published in the Official
Gazette, make such provisions or take such measures, not
inconsistent with the provisions of this Act, as may appear to
be necessary or expedient for removing the difficulty.
Provided that no order shall be made under this section after
the expiry of three (3) years from the commencement of this
Act.
(2) The Government may make an order under sub-section (1) to
have effect from any date not earlier than the date of
commencement of this Act.
23rd FEBRUARY, 2026] ANDHRA PRADESH GAZETTE EXTRAORDINARY 37
STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
The Prisons of Andhra Pradesh are broadly governed by the Prisons
Act 1894 and Prisoners Act 1900 and the present day Prison Administration
is run through the rules framed under these Acts and provisions derived
from these Acts. However these Acts which were enacted more than 100
years ago were basically punitive in nature, enacted with the objective of
primarily to punish the Prisoners during the British era.
However, with the lapse of 125 years since the enactment of these
Acts, several societal changes have taken place. Concepts of human rights,
a paradigm shift in approaches to crime and punishment, and the
recognition of prisonersвҖҷ rights in conformity with international covenants
and treaties have emerged. These Acts also do not conform to modern
evolutionary concepts of reformation, rehabilitation, and reintegration of
prisoners back into society.
Further, these century-old Acts do not cover the several
technological advancements that have taken place in prison administration.
New technical equipment and gadgets have been introduced in the area
of prison security, such as biometric systems, CCTV surveillance, scanning
and detection devices, Radio Frequency Identification Devices (RFID),
video conferencing facilities, and video calling facilities for prisoners. These
technologies are now being implemented in prisons to enable prisoners
to attend court hearings and trials and to provide a seamless biometric
access control system for their movement. The Transfer of Prisoners Act,
1950, which deals with the transfer of prisoners from one State to another
State or Union Territory, has also outlived its utility and requires
amendments.
As such, the Ministry of Home Affairs has felt that it is high time to
replace these pre-independence Acts with a new law that encompasses
all the changes that have taken place over the past 125 years. However,
since prisons fall under the State List as per the Constitution, the Ministry
of Home Affairs has drafted a new Act titled вҖңModel Prisons and
Correctional Services Act, 2023вҖқ for adoption by the States, with provisions
to make necessary modifications in accordance with their specific
requirements.
38 ANDHRA PRADESH GAZETTE EXTRAORDINARY [PART IV-A
Accordingly, the Government of Andhra Pradesh have decided to
enact a new Act titled вҖңAndhra Pradesh Prisons and Correctional Services
Act, 2026вҖқ in line with the draft Act prepared by the Ministry of Home Affairs.
This new legislation incorporates all the structural changes that the prison
administration has undergone over the past 125 years in the areas of
correctional philosophy and correctional management. It also addresses
the technological advancements in prison administration, introduces
stringent punishments for the use of mobile phones within prisons, and
includes provisions for staff welfare and prisoner welfare. The new Act
proposes to repeal the existing Prisons Act, 1894, Prisoners Act, 1900,
and Transfer of Prisoners Act, 1950.
The Bill seeks to give effect to the above decisions.
VANGALAPUDI ANITHA
Minister for Home Affairs & Disaster Management
23rd FEBRUARY, 2026] ANDHRA PRADESH GAZETTE EXTRAORDINARY 39
FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM
The Prison administration in Andhra Pradesh is governed by outdated
laws-namely, the Prisons Act, 1894, the Prisoners Act, 1900, and the Transfer
of Prisoners Act, 1950-which were primarily punitive in nature and framed
during the British era. These Acts, being over 125 years old, do not address
modern principles such as human rights, prisoner rehabilitation, and
reintegration into society. Furthermore, they lack the legal framework to
incorporate technological advancements such as CCTV surveillance,
biometrics, RFID access, and video conferencing / calling facilities, which are
essential for effective and secure prison management today. Recognizing
these gaps, the Ministry of Home Affairs has introduced the Model Prisons
and Correctional Services Act, 2023, intended for adoption by States. In line
with this initiative, the Government of Andhra Pradesh has drafted the Andhra
Pradesh Prisons and Correctional Services Act, 2026 to modernise the prison
system. The proposed Act focuses on correctional philosophy, welfare of staff
and prisoners, integration of modern technology, and stringent control of
contraband including mobile phones. It seeks to repeal the existing colonial-
era laws and establish a progressive, reform-oriented correctional framework
in the State.
The Clauses 4, 5(1)-(5), 10, 11, 20, 29(1)-(4), 31(1)-(3), 35(1), 39(1)
(3), 40(1)-(2), 43(1)-(3), 52, 53, 54, 55, 56(1)-(6), 58, 60(1), and 68(1)-(2) of
the Bill entail financial implications, an amount of Rs. 200 Crores is estimated
to be required to meet these contingencies in a phased manner. The proposal
for adoption of the Model Prisons Act, 2023, formulated by the Ministry of
Home Affairs, Govt, of India by enacting the Andhra Pradesh Prisons and
Correctional Services Bill, 2026., with a projected outlay of Rs.200 Crore
over 4 years is considered, duly utilizing Govt, of India funds under the
Modernization of Prisons Project, supplementing from AP Prison Development
Board Fund, if any State Budget support is sought will be considered under
SASCI in a phased manner and Recurring expenditure will be met from regular
departmental budget.
VANGALAPUDI ANITHA
Minister for Home Affairs & Disaster Management
23rd FEBRUARY, 2026] ANDHRA PRADESH GAZETTE EXTRAORDINARY 41
MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION
Clauses 1(3); 2(22),(30),(34); 5(1),(2),(3); 6; 8(1),(2); 9(3);
10(1),(3), (4),(5); 11(1); 12(3),(4),(5); 13(2),(3); 14; 15; 16; 17; 18; 19;
22(1),(5); 23; 25(1); 26; 28(1); 29(1),(2),(4); 30(2); 31(1),(2),(3); 32;
33(5(k)),(7),(8);34(2)(3); 35(3); 36(1); 37 (1),(2),(3); 38; 39(3); 40(1)(2);
41; 42(2); 43(1); 44(1),(2),(3),(4); 45(1)(3); 46(2)(3); 47(a),(w),(y); 48(6);
52; 55(2); 56(1),(2),(3),(6); 57; 58(1); 59(1),(2); 61 (2)(3); 62(1),(3),(5),(8);
63; 64(1),(2); 65; 67(1); 68(1); 69; 70(1); 72; 75; 77; 78(2); 80 and 82(1) of
the Bill authorizes the Government to issue notifications in respect of the
matters specified therein and generally to carry out the purposes of the
Act.
All such notifications issued, which are intended to cover the
matters mostly of procedural in nature are to be laid on the table of the
both Houses of the State Legislature and will be subject to any modifications
made by the Legislature.
The above provisions of the Bill regarding delegated legislation
are thus of normal type and mainly intended to cover matters of procedure.
VANGALAPUDI ANITHA
Minister for Home Affairs & Disaster Management
23rd FEBRUARY, 2026] ANDHRA PRADESH GAZETTE EXTRAORDINARY 43
MEMORANDUM UNDER RULE 95 OF THE RULES OF PROCEDURE
AND CONDUCT OF BUSINESS IN THE ANDHRA PRADESH
LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY.
The Andhra Pradesh Prisons and Correctional Services Bill, 2026,
after it is passed by the Legislature of the State may be submitted to the
Governor for his assent under Article 200 of the Constitution of India.
VANGALAPUDI ANITHA
Minister for Home Affairs & Disaster Management
PRASANNA KUMAR SURYADEVARA
Secretary-General to Legislature.
