TAMIL NADU GOVERNMENT GAZETTE EXTRAORDINARY 107
Under Rule 130 of the Tamil Nadu Legislative Assembly Rules, the
following Bill which was introduced in the Legislative Assembly of the
State of Tamil Nadu on 24th January, 2026 is published together with
Statement of Objects and Reasons for general information:-
L.A.Bill No. 8 of 2026
A Bill further to amend the Tamil Nadu Agricultural
Produce Marketing (Regulation) Act, 1987.
BE it enacted by the Legislative Assembly of the State of
Tamil Nadu in the Seventy-sixth Year of the Republic of India as
follows:—
1. (1) This Act may be called the Tamil Nadu Agricultural Short title and
Produce Marketing (Regulation) Amendment Act, 2026. commencement.
(2) It shall be deemed to have come into force on the
30th day of November 2025.
Tamil Nadu 2. In section 33 of the Tamil Nadu Agricultural Produce Marketing Amendment of
Act 27 of 1989. (Regulation) Act, 1987 (hereinafter referred to as the principal Act), section 33.
in the proviso to sub-section (1), for the expression “fourteen years
and six months”, the expression “fifteen years and six months” shall
be substituted.
3. Notwithstanding anything contained in the principal Validation.
Act, every person exercising the powers and discharging the
functions of a Special Officer of the market committees, with
effect on and from the 30th day of November 2025, shall be
deemed to have been appointed as such Special Officers under
sub-section (1) of section 33 of the principal Act, as amended by
this Act, and anything done or any action taken by the said Special
Officers during the period commencing on the 30th day of November
2025 and ending with the date of publication of this Act in the
Tamil Nadu Government Gazette, shall be deemed to have been
validly done or taken under the principal Act, as amended by this Act.
108 TAMIL NADU GOVERNMENT GAZETTE EXTRAORDINARY
STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS.
Sub-section (1) of section 33 of the Tamil Nadu Agricultural Produce Marketing (Regulation) Act, 1987
(Tamil Nadu Act 27 of 1989) empowers the Government to appoint a Special Officer to manage the affairs of a
market committee for a period not exceeding one year at a time and the said period may be extended by the
Government from time to time subject to the condition that the such order of extension shall not remain in force
for more than three years in the aggregate. By virtue of the said provision, Special Officers were appointed
to several market committees to manage its affairs. The maximum period for which such order of extension
shall remain in force was enhanced from time to time beyond the said period of three years, by amending
the proviso to sub-section (1) of section 33 of the said Act. Lastly the maximum period for which an order of
extension shall remain in force was extended to fourteen years and six months by the Tamil Nadu Act 36 of
2024.
2. As some more time is required to nominate members to three of the market committees, namely,
Tiruchirappalli, Cuddalore and Theni, there is a compelling necessity to extend the tenure of the Special
Officers of the said three market committees for a further period of one year beyond the period of fourteen
years and six months permissible under the proviso to sub-section (1) of section 33 of the said Act.
3. Accordingly, the Government have decided to amend the proviso to sub-section (1) of section 33 of
the said Tamil Nadu Act 27 of 1989 to enhance the period specified therein to fifteen years and six months
in order to extend the tenure of the Special Officers of the said three market committees for a further period
of one year and validate the action of the Special Officers of the said three market committees beyond 29th
November 2025.
4. The Bill seeks to give effect to the above said decision.
M.R.K. PANNEERSELVAM,
Minister for Agriculture-Farmers Welfare.
Secretariat,
Chennai, K. SRINIVASAN,
24th January 2026. Principal Secretary.
