1
AS INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA
Bill No. 106 of 2025
THE MINES AND MINERALS (DEVELOPMENT AND
REGULATION) AMENDMENT BILL, 2025
A
BILL
further to amend the Mines and Minerals (Development and Regulation) Act, 1957.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Seventy-sixth Year of the Republic of India
as follows:—
1. (1) This Act may be called the Mines and Minerals (Development and Short title and
Regulation) Amendment Act, 2025. commencement.
5 (2) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by
notification in the Official Gazette, appoint.
67 of 1957. 2. In the Mines and Minerals (Development and Regulation) Act, 1957 Amendment of
section 3.
(hereinafter referred to as the principal Act), in section 3, after clause (ae), the
following clause shall be inserted, namely:—
2
‘(af) “mineral exchange” means an electronic trading platform or
marketplace registered in accordance with the provisions of this Act, where
buyers and sellers of minerals, its concentrate or its processed forms (including
metals), transact, trade and enter into contract, including in derivatives;’.
Insertion of new 3. In the principal Act, after section 6, the following section shall be inserted, 5
section 6A. namely:—
‘6A. (1) Notwithstanding anything contained in section 10,—
Inclusion of
contiguous area
(a) a holder of a mining lease of deep-seated mineral, may apply
in the leased
area or area for a one-time extension of the existing leased area to include therein a
under composite contiguous area not exceeding ten per cent. of the existing leased area; 10
licence in case
of deep-seated (b) a holder of a composite licence in respect of deep-seated
minerals. mineral, may apply for a one-time extension of the area under the
composite licence, to include therein a contiguous area not exceeding
thirty per cent. of the existing area under the licence.
(2) Upon receipt of such application, the State Government may extend 15
the existing leased area or the area under composite licence, as the case may
be, to include therein the contiguous area subject to such terms and conditions
and on payment of such additional amount as may be prescribed by the Central
Government.
Explanation.—For the purposes of this section, the expression “deep- 20
seated minerals” means such minerals which occur at a depth of more than
two hundred meters from the surface of land with poor surface
manifestations.’.
Amendment of 4. In the principal Act, in section 8A, in sub-section (7A),—
section 8A.
(i) the words “up to fifty per cent. of the total mineral produced in a year” 25
shall be omitted;
(ii) for the first proviso, the following shall be substituted, namely:—
“Provided that the State Government may permit sale of dumps
which has been stacked up to such date as may be specified by the
Central Government in the leased area on payment of additional amount 30
specified in the Sixth Schedule:”.
Amendment of 5. In the principal Act, in section 9C,—
section 9C.
(i) for the marginal heading, the following marginal heading shall be
substituted, namely:—
“National Mineral Exploration and Development Trust.”; 35
(ii) in sub-section (1), for the words “National Mineral Exploration
Trust”, the words “National Mineral Exploration and Development Trust”
shall be substituted;
(iii) for sub-section (2), the following sub-section shall be substituted,
namely:— 40
“(2) The object of the Trust shall be to use the funds accrued to the
Trust within India, including the offshore areas, and outside India for the
purposes of regional and detailed exploration and development of mines
and minerals in such manner as may be prescribed by the Central
Government.”; 45
(iv) in sub-section (4), for the words “two per cent.”, the words “three
per cent.” shall be substituted;
(v) in sub-section (5), for the words “National Mineral Exploration
Trust”, the words “National Mineral Exploration and Development Trust”
shall be substituted. 50
3
6. In the principal Act, in section 10B, in sub-section (2), the words “, after Amendment of
section 10B.
obtaining the previous approval of the Central Government,” shall be omitted.
7. In the principal Act, in section 13, in sub-section (2),— Amendment of
section 13.
(i) after clause (k), the following clause shall be inserted, namely:—
5 “(ka) terms and conditions and additional amount under
sub-section (2) of section 6A;”;
(ii) in clauses (qqb), (qqc) and (qqd), for the words “National Mineral
Exploration Trust”, the words “National Mineral Exploration and
Development Trust” shall be substituted;
10 (iii) after clause (xb), the following clause shall be inserted, namely:—
“(xc) conditions for inclusion of any mineral other than minor
mineral in a lease granted in respect of a minor mineral under
sub-section (5) of section 15B;”.
8. In the principal Act, after section 15A, the following section shall be Insertion of new
section 15B.
15 inserted, namely:—
“15B. (1) A holder of a mining lease may apply to the State Government Inclusion of
for inclusion of any other mineral in his mining lease on the basis of a other minerals in
mining lease.
geological report in relation to that lease and the State Government shall
permit inclusion of such mineral within sixty days of such application, subject
20 to the payment of such additional amount on dispatch of the included mineral
as specified in the Eighth Schedule.
(2) The Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette,
and for reasons to be recorded in writing, amend the Eighth Schedule so as to
modify the entries mentioned therein with effect from such date as may be
25 specified in the said notification.
(3) The holder of mining lease shall submit such reports or returns to the
State Government and any other authority in respect of the included mineral
as may be specified by the Central Government.
(4) The provision of this section shall apply for inclusion of any minor
30 mineral in a lease granted in respect of a mineral other than minor mineral and
the State Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, specify the
royalty and other payments to be made by the lessee on dispatch of such
included minor mineral.
(5) Inclusion of any mineral other than minor mineral in a lease granted
35 in respect of a minor mineral shall be made in accordance with the conditions
as may be prescribed for this purpose by the Central Government and such
rules may provide for all or any of the matters, namely:—
(i) the extent of presence of mineral other than minor mineral as
compared to minor mineral in the lease;
40
(ii) termination of the lease in the interest of regulation of mines
and mineral development and grant of a fresh lease in the area as a lease
in respect of mineral other than minor mineral;
(iii) regulation of such lease as a lease granted for mineral other
than minor minerals;
45 (iv) additional payment as specified in the Eighth Schedule to be
made upon inclusion of a mineral other than minor mineral.
(6) Any mineral may be included under this section in a mining lease
granted in respect of atomic mineral specified in Part B of the First Schedule
where the grade of atomic mineral is equal to or above the notified threshold
50 value with prior approval of the Central Government.
4
(7) No atomic mineral as specified in Part B of the First Schedule where
the grade of atomic mineral is equal to or above the notified threshold value
shall be included in the mining lease granted in respect of minerals other than
such atomic minerals.”.
Insertion of new 9. In the principal Act, after section 18A, the following section shall be 5
section 18B. inserted, namely: —
Development of “18B. (1) The Central Government shall endeavour to promote
market. development of market, including trading, of minerals, its concentrate or its
processed forms (including metals) through mineral exchanges in such manner
as may be prescribed by the Central Government. 10
(2) The Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette,
appoint any authority to register and regulate mineral exchanges.
(3) In particular and without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing
power, such rules may provide for all or any of the following matters,
namely:— 15
(a) registration of mineral exchanges and revocation of such
registration;
(b) regulation of all aspects and activities of mineral exchanges and
market oversight;
(c) levy of fees and other charges; 20
(d) maintenance of a data bank of information on activities relating
to mineral trading on mineral exchanges;
(e) prevention of cartelization, insider trading, circular trading,
market manipulation and any other matter which is detrimental to the
participants of the mineral exchanges; 25
(f) grievance redressal of participants of mineral exchanges; and
(g) any other matter which is to be, or may be, prescribed.”.
Amendment of 10. In the principal Act, in the Fifth Schedule,—
Fifth Schedule.
(i) for serial number 2 and the entries relating thereto, the following
serial numbers and the entries shall be substituted, namely:—
“2. Minerals specified in Part-D of the First Nil 30
Schedule
2A. Minerals specified in Seventh Schedule Equivalent to fifty per
(other than those specified in Part-D of the cent. of the royalty
First Schedule) payable”;
(ii) in the Explanation, for the words “National Mineral Exploration 35
Trust”, the words “National Mineral Exploration and Development Trust”
shall be substituted.
Amendment of 11. In the principal Act, in the Sixth Schedule,—
Sixth Schedule.
(i) under the sub-heading (i) for non-auctioned captive mines (other than
coal and lignite), after serial number 5 and the entries relating thereto, the 40
following serial numbers and the entries shall be inserted, namely:—
“5A. Minerals specified in Part-D of the First Nil”;
Schedule
5
(ii) in the Explanation, under clause (a), for the words “National Mineral
Exploration Trust”, the words “National Mineral Exploration and
Development Trust” shall be substituted.
12. In the principal Act, after the Seventh Schedule, the following Schedule Insertion of new
shall be inserted, namely:— Schedule.
5
“THE EIGHTH SCHEDULE
[See section 15B (1), (2) and (5)]
Type of mining lease Additional amount in Additional amount in
case the included mineral case the included
is a mineral specified in mineral is not a mineral
10
Part-D of the First specified in Part-D of the
Schedule or the Seventh First Schedule or the
Schedule Seventh Schedule
(1) (2) (3)
15
(i) Auctioned mining Nil. Nil.
lease (including coal
and lignite mining lease
auctioned on revenue
share basis for sale of
20 coal).
(ii) Non-auctioned Nil. Equivalent to amount of
mining lease. royalty on the included
mineral.
(iii) Coal and lignite Nil. Equivalent to amount of
25 mining lease auctioned royalty on the included
on per tonne basis or mineral.
power tariff basis.
Explanation.—For the purpose of this Schedule, it is hereby clarified that—
30 (i) the additional amount shall be in addition to royalty or payment to the
District Mineral Foundation and National Mineral Exploration and
Development Trust or any other statutory payment;
(ii) in case an additional amount specified in the Fifth Schedule is paid
by the lessee in respect of a mineral, no additional amount under this Schedule
35 shall be payable in respect of such included mineral;
(iii) in case of auctioned mines,—
(a) auction premium shall not be payable in respect of the included
mineral if the included mineral is a mineral specified in Part-D of the
First Schedule or the Seventh Schedule;
40 (b) auction premium shall be payable in respect of the included
mineral if the included mineral is not a mineral specified in Part-D of the
First Schedule or the Seventh Schedule.”.
6
STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
The Mines and Minerals (Development and Regulation) Act, 1957 was
enacted to provide for the development and regulation of mines and minerals under
the control of the Union.
2. The Act, being a part of the policy regulating economic development of the
country, has been amended several times over the years. The last amendment made
in the Act in 2023 focused on increasing exploration and production of critical and
strategic minerals in the country by introducing a new list of 24 critical and strategic
minerals; empowering the Central Government to auction mineral concessions in
respect of such minerals and introduction of exploration licence for critical and
deep-seated minerals.
3. The significance of critical and strategic minerals in the development of the
country is continuously increasing and recent global geo-political developments has
constricted the supply-chains of these minerals. India is mostly dependent on import
of these minerals. A National Critical Mineral Mission has been launched to increase
domestic production, including from the offshore areas of India, secure supply-
chains from outside India and promote processing of critical minerals. There is an
urgent need to further amend the Act to support the National Critical Mineral
Mission in its objectives. Further, certain amendments are needed to provide simpler
regime for promoting conservation of minerals, zero waste mining and extraction of
deep-seated minerals.
4. The Mines and Minerals (Development and Regulation) Amendment Bill,
2025, inter alia, provides for the following, namely:—
(i) to widen the scope and territorial domain of the National Mineral
Exploration Trust to enable use of the funds accrued to the Trust within India,
including the offshore areas, and outside India for the purposes of exploration
and development of mines and minerals;
(ii) to rename the Trust as the National Mineral Exploration and
Development Trust to reflect its enlarged scope and increase the amount of
payment to the Trust by the lessees from present two per cent. of the royalty
payable to three per cent. of the royalty payable;
(iii) to enable the inclusion of any new mineral in a mining lease subject to
the conditions prescribed by the Central Government and the additional amount
payable as specified in the proposed Eighth Schedule to the Act. No additional
amount is applicable on inclusion of critical and strategic mineral or minerals
specified in the Seventh Schedule to the Act to incentivise production of these
minerals which are found in small quantity and are difficult to mine and process;
(iv) to enable one-time extension of the area under a mining lease or
composite licence to include therein a contiguous area not exceeding ten per
cent. or thirty per cent., respectively, of the existing area under the lease or
licence subject to such terms and conditions and additional payment as may be
prescribed in rules by the Central Government. This will promote optimal
mining of deep-seated minerals which are locked up in contiguous areas and
may not be economically viable to be extracted under a separate lease or
licence;
6
7
(v) to empower the Central Government to promote development of
market, including trading, of minerals, its concentrate or its processed forms
(including metals) through mineral exchanges. With the increased availability
and demand of minerals in the country, there is need to provide a dynamic
market mechanism for minerals backed by a robust regulatory regime. Setting
up of mineral exchanges will help miners and end-users of minerals in
determining fair and transparent market prices based on supply and demand
dynamics, stabilise markets and aid in budgeting and planning. This will
promote investment in mining sector and infrastructure related to transport and
storage;
(vi)to remove the limit on sale of minerals from the captive mines so that
miners can sell minerals after meeting the requirement of the end use plant
linked with the mine and on payment of additional amount specified in the Act;
(vii)to allow sale of dumps which have been stacked up to such date as
may be specified by the Central Government in captive leases which cannot be
captively utilised to reduce environment hazards and increase safety in mine
workings, bring more minerals in the market and provide additional revenue to
the States.
5.The Bill seeks to achieve the above objectives.
NEW DELHI; G.KISHAN REDDY.
The 8th August, 2025.
_________
PRESIDENT’S RECOMMENDATION UNDER ARTICLE 117 OF THE
CONSTITUTION OF INDIA
_________
[Copy of letter No. M.VI-16/7/2024-Mines VI, dated 09 August, 2025
from Shri G. Kishan Reddy, Minister of Coal and Mines to the
Secretary-General, Lok Sabha]
The President having been informed of the subject matter of the
proposed Bill recommends to the House under clauses (3) of article 117 of
the Constitution of India, the consideration of "the Mines and Minerals
(Development and Regulation) Amendment Bill, 2025" in the Lok Sabha
_________
8
FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM
The Bill seeks to amend the Mines and Minerals (Development and
Regulation) Act, 1957 to increase exploration and mining of critical and strategic
and deep-seated minerals in the country, enable securing global supply-chains of
critical and strategic minerals and to put the nation's mineral resources to the best
use for national economic growth.
2. Clause 4 of the Bill proposes to amend section 9C of the said Act to widen
the scope and territorial domain of the National Mineral Exploration Trust to enable
use of the funds accrued to the Trust within India, including the offshore areas, and
outside India for the purposes of exploration and development of mines and
minerals. Under the existing provision of section 9C of the Act, the holder of a
mining lease or composite licence is mandated to pay to the Trust, a sum equivalent
to two per cent. of royalty paid in terms of the Second Schedule to the Act. The Bill
also proposes to increase the amount of payment to the Trust by the lessees from
present two per cent. of the royalty payable to three per cent. of the royalty payable.
3. At present around 1,000 crore rupees accrues annually to the Trust and the
Trust fund is kept in the public account of India which currently has a corpus of
around 3,500 crore rupees. As proposed, if the amount of payment to the Trust is
increased from present two per cent. to three per cent. of the royalty payable, an
additional corpus of around 2,500 crore rupees would accrue to the Trust in the next
five years. This amount would be required to meet the enhanced scope and territorial
domain of the Trust. An expenditure of 8,700 crore rupees in next five years is
envisaged from the Trust under the National Critical Mineral Mission.
4. The accrual to and expenditure from the Trust are done through
Consolidated Fund of India. All the expenditure from the Trust and Consolidated
Fund of India would be of non-recurring in nature.
5. Other proposals of the Bill, if enacted, are not likely to involve any recurring
or non-recurring expenditure.
8
9
MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION
Clause 6 of the Bill seeks to amend sub-section (2) of section 13 of the Mines
and Minerals (Development and Regulation) Act, 1957 to empower the Central
Government to make rules to provide for—(i) additional amount to be paid by a
holder of a mining lease or composite licence, as the case may be, on extension of
the existing leased area or the area under composite licence; and (ii) conditions for
inclusion of any mineral other than minor mineral in a lease granted in respect of a
minor mineral.
2. Clause 7 of the Bill seeks to insert a new section 15B in the said Act. Sub-
section (2) of the said section empowers the Central Government to amend, by
notification in the Official Gazette and for reasons to be recorded in writing, the
Eighth Schedule which specifies the additional amount payable by a lessee on
dispatch of the included mineral. Sub-section (4) of the said section empowers the
State Government to specify the royalty and other payments to be made by a lessee
on dispatch of minor mineral included in a lease granted in respect of a mineral other
than minor mineral.
3. Clause 9 of the Bill seeks to insert new section 18B in the said Act to
empower the Central Government to promote development of market, including
trading, of minerals, its concentrate or its processed forms (including metals)
through mineral exchanges in such manner as may be provided by rules by the
Central Government. Sub-section (3) of said section empowers the Central
Government to make rules to provide for,—(i) registration of mineral exchanges
and revocation of such registration; (ii) regulation of all aspects and activities of
mineral exchanges and market oversight; (iii) levy of fees and other charges; (iv)
maintenance of a data bank of information on activities relating to mineral trading
on mineral exchanges; (v) prevention of cartelization, insider trading, circular
trading, market manipulation and any other matter which is detrimental to the
participants of the mineral exchanges; (vi) grievance redressal of participants of
mineral exchanges; and (vii) any other matter which is to be, or may be, prescribed.
4. The matters in respect of which rules may be made and notifications issued
are matters of procedure and administrative detail and it is not practicable to provide
for them in the proposed legislation itself. The delegation of legislative power is,
therefore, of a normal character.
9
ANNEXURE
EXTRACTS FROM THE MINES AND MINERALS (DEVELOPMENT AND REGULATION)
ACT, 1957
(67 OF 1957)
* * * * *
Period of grant 8A. (1) * * * * *
of a mining lease
(7A) Any lessee may, where mineral is used for captive purpose, sell mineral
for minerals
other than coal, up to fifty per cent. of the total mineral produced in a year after meeting the
lignite and requirement of the end use plant linked with the mine in such manner as may be
atomic minerals.
prescribed by the Central Government and on payment of such additional amount
as specified in the Sixth Schedule:
Provided that the Central Government may, by notification in the Official
Gazette and for the reasons to be recorded in writing, increase the said percentage
of mineral that may be sold by a Government company or corporation:
Provided further that the Central Government may, by notification in the
Official Gazette and for reasons to be recorded in writing, amend the Sixth Schedule
so as to modify the entries mentioned therein with effect from such date as may be
specified in the said notification.
* * * * *
National Mineral 9C. (1) The Central Government shall, by notification, establish a Trust, as
Exploration a non-profit autonomous body, to be called the National Mineral Exploration Trust.
Trust.
(2) The object of the Trust shall be to use the funds accrued to the Trust for
the purposes of regional and detailed exploration in such manner as may be
prescribed by the Central Government.
* * * * *
(4) The holder of a mining lease or a mineral concession shall pay to the Trust,
a sum equivalent to two per cent. of the royalty paid in terms of the Second
Schedule, in such manner as may be prescribed by the Central Government.
(5) The entities specified and notified under sub-section (1) of section 4 shall
be eligible for funding under the National Mineral Exploration Trust.
* * * * *
Grant of mining 10B. (1) * * * * *
lease in respect
of notified (2) Where there is inadequate evidence to show the existence of mineral
minerals through contents of any notified mineral in respect of any area, a State Government may,
auction.
after obtaining the previous approval of the Central Government, grant a composite
licence for the said notified mineral in such area in accordance with the procedure
laid down in section 11.
* * * * *
13. (1) * * * * *
Power of Central
Government to
(2) In particular, and without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing
make rules in
respect of power, such rules may provide for all or any of the following matters, namely:—
minerals.
* * * * *
(qqb) the manner of usage of funds accrued to the National Mineral
Exploration Trust under sub-section (2) of section 9C;
(qqc) the composition and functions of the National Mineral Exploration
Trust under sub-section (3) of section 9C;
10
11
(qqd) the manner of payment of amount to the National Mineral
Exploration Trust under sub-section (4) of section 9C;
* * * * *
THE FIFTH SCHEDULE
[See sections 8(4), 8A(8) and 17A(2C)]
* * * * *
2. Copper Equivalent to fifty per cent. of the royalty payable
* * * * *
Explanation.—For the purposes of this Schedule, the additional amount shall
be in addition to royalty or payment to the District Mineral Foundation and National
Mineral Exploration Trust or any other statutory payment.
THE SIXTH SCHEDULE
[See sections 8(5) and 8A(7A)]
(i)For non-auctioned captive mines (other than coal and lignite):
* * * * *
Explanation.—For the purposes of this Schedule, it is hereby clarified that—
(a) the additional amount shall be in addition to royalty or payment to
the District Mineral Foundation and National Mineral Exploration Trust or
any other statutory payment or payment specified in the tender document or
the auction premium (wherever applicable).
(b) Ad valorem royalty for the purpose of calculating the additional
amount for coal and lignite shall be based on National Coal Index and
Representative Price of coal excluding the taxes, levies and other charges.
* * * * *
10
LOK SABHA
————
A
BILL
further to amend the Mines and Minerals (De velopment and Regulation) Act, 1957.
————
(Shri G. Kishan Reddy, Minister of Coal and Mines)
