KARNATAKA LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY
SIXTEENTH LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY
NINTH SESSION
(Adjourned Meeting)
KARNATAKA FREEDOM OF CHOICE IN MARRIAGE AND PREVENTION AND
PROHIBITION OF CRIMES IN THE NAME OF HONOUR AND TRADITION
(EVA NAMMAVA EVA NAMMAVA) BILL, 2026
(LA Bill No. 07 of 2026)
Whereas the Constitution of India guarantees to all persons the fundamental
rights to equality before the law and equal protection of the laws (Article 14), the
right to life and personal liberty (Article 21), and the freedoms of expression,
association, and movement (Article 19);
And whereas the primordial human rights of life, liberty, equality and dignity
enshrined in the Protection of Human Rights Act, 1993 shall be available to persons
exercising their decisional freedom;
And whereas these rights include the autonomy of all persons to choose their
partners, to enter into marriage and to lead lives with dignity;
And whereas the Constitution recognizes the liberty and autonomy which
inheres in each individual and includes the ability to take decisions on aspects
which define one's personhood and identity. This includes the choice of a partner in
marriage;
And whereas an alarming increase in violence, harassment, threats, and
social ostracism—often perpetrated in the name of caste hierarchy, honour,
custom, - is being directed against individuals, especially young couples, who
exercise their right to marry;
And whereas such violence disproportionately affects women, who are
subjected to patriarchal control over their choices, and men from marginalized
communities, who are targeted when their relationships cross caste boundaries;
And whereas endogamy operates as a structural mechanism designed to
preserve the caste system, and inter-caste marriages serve as essential instruments
for dismantling its rigid and oppressive framework and for advancing the
constitutional principle of fraternity;
And whereas the Constitution of India enshrines the principle of fraternity as
essential to securing the dignity of the individual and the unity and integrity of the
nation, and this principle demands the eradication of caste-based discrimination
and the promotion of social solidarity through the recognition and protection of
inter-caste marriages;
2
And whereas such acts constitute a grave violation of constitutional rights
and human dignity, and must be recognized not as private or familial matters, but
as serious offences warranting legal intervention and protection;
And whereas it is necessary to prevent individuals and groups from enforcing
caste based discrimination in individual choices;
And whereas it is necessary to create an environment of inclusivity,
promoting fraternity, mirroring the all embracing time honoured principle of "Eva
Nammava, Eva Nammava.";
And whereas it is necessary that proactive steps be taken to prevent the
commission of such acts and to establish comprehensive protective measures,
including preventive, remedial, and rehabilitative mechanisms, to safeguard
individuals and to ensure that State authorities are under a legal obligation to
respond effectively and uphold the constitutional rights to dignity, liberty, and
equality;
Now therefore, it is expedient to enact a law to affirm and protect the liberty,
dignity, and autonomy of all persons, to prevent crimes committed in the name of
“honour” and tradition, to penalize any conduct that interferes with individual
freedom of choice in marriage and to provide legal safeguards, remedies, and
institutional mechanisms for prevention, redressal, and rehabilitation.
Be it enacted by the Karnataka State Legislature in the Seventy-seventh Year
of the Republic of India as follow:-
1. Short title and commencement.- (1) This Act may be called the Karnataka
Freedom of Choice in Marriage and Prevention and Prohibition of Crimes in the
name of Honour and Tradition (Eva Nammava Eva Nammava)Act, 2026.
(2) It shall come into force on such date as the State Government may, by
notification in the Official Gazette, appoint.
2. Definitions.- (1) In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,-
(a) "Inter-caste marriage" means a marriage between persons belonging to
two different castes or sub-castes;
(b) “Social and economic boycott” includes all such acts as are calculated to
lead to the boycott or enforcement of social or economic sanctions and
includes the following acts, namely:-
(i) bringing pressure on the couple or their families or relatives to
leave the village or area of residence concerned;
(ii) a refusal to permit a person to render to other person or receive
from him any customary service or to abstain from social
relations that one would maintain with other person or to
isolate him from others;
(iii) indulging in any conduct which will impede or is likely to
impede, access to markers, community facilities, placed of
worship or any other necessities of life;
3
(iv) divesting or dispossessing the couple or their families of any
land or property belonging to them or imposing of fine or
penalty of any kind;
(v) a refusal to deal with, work for hire or do business;
(vi) to deny opportunities including access to services or
contractual opportunities for rendering service for
consideration: or to refuse to do anything on the terms on
which things would be commonly done in the ordinary course
of business; or
(vii) to abstain from any professional or business relations;
(viii) to refuse to do anything on the terms on which things would
be commonly done in the ordinary course of business;
(ix) to abstain from the professional or business relations that one
would maintain with other person;
(x) to abstain from lending loan or credit; and
(xi) to refuse admission in school.
(2) Words and expressions used but not defined in this Act and defined in the
Bharatiya Nyaya Sanhitha, 2023 (Central Act 45 of 2023) or Bharatiya Nagarika
Suraksha Sanhitha, 2023 (Central Act 46 of 2023) shall have the meanings
assigned to them respectively in the Bharatiya Nyaya Sanhitha, 2023(Central Act
45 of 2023) or Bharatiya Nagarik Suraksha Sanhitha, 2023(Central Act 46 of 2023).
3. Freedom to marry.- (1) All persons shall have the right to autonomy over
their own lives, including the rights to liberty, freedom of expression, and freedom
to marry a person of their choice.
(2) Without prejudice to the generality of sub-section (1), it is hereby declared
that any two persons who are otherwise eligible to marry have a right to marry any
person of their choice without any hindrance from anyone including the parents
and family members of both the parties.
(3) The consent of the person’s parents, family, caste or clan is not necessary
once the two adult individuals agree to enter into a marriage.
(4) Any action to prevent the exercise of the rights referred to in
sub-section (1) and (2) by any person or a group of persons shall amount to an
offence under the provisions of this Act.
4. Declaration by a couple who intend to go for inter-caste marriage.-
Any two persons desirous of marrying each other shall been titled to declare their
age and willingness to be together, in oral or in writing to the District Magistrate or
any Nodal officer as designated for this purpose by the District Magistrate, who
shall send the said information to the nearest police station and no action shall be
taken by the police and / or any other authority at the instance of any other party,
4
including the family members or relatives or community members of either party or
any third party, against the said couple:
Provided that such a declaration shall not be a pre-condition for the persons
to exercise their rights under section 3.
Provided further that, such a declaration shall be made by a person above
the age of eighteen years in case of female and twenty one years in case of male.
5. Prohibition of crimes in the name of honour or tradition.- (1) No
person or persons shall commit any acts in the name of caste, culture, custom,
tradition or so-called “honour” or tradition against any person or persons on the
ground that the person has transgressed cultural, caste, social or traditional norms
or customs of appropriate behaviour.
(2) Without prejudice to the generality of sub-section (1) acts which would
amount to crimes in the name of honour and tradition would include but are not
limited to,-
(i) Causing death, physical harm or injury to either partner in the
couple or anyone connected with them;
(ii) Harassing the couple or either of them not to meet or associate
with or live with each other, either physically or through any
means of communication;
(iii) Abducting the victim and / or their partner or anyone
associated with them;
(iv) Imposing social and economic boycott on the couple or their
family or anyone associated with them;
(v) Excommunicating, ostracization or forcible removal or
displacement / eviction of the couple or their family or relatives
from the village, town or area they live in;
(vi) Asking the couple or anyone associated with them or
harbouring them to pay a fine;
(vii) Threatening the couple or either of them or their family or
anyone associated with them of retributive action of any kind
whatsoever;
(viii) Individually or collectively exhorting or bringing pressure
directly or indirectly upon any person or persons to prevent or
disapprove of the marriage or association which is objected to,
or to generate an environment of hostility towards such couple
or either of them or their supporters;
(ix) Forcibly declaring the couple who have got married as brother
and sister;
(x) Performing symbolic disownment rituals (such as thithi or
equivalent death ceremonies) against a living person;
5
(xi) Wrongfully denying or interfering with succession rights in
property;
(xii) Any other act or acts of harassment or intimidation, whether
physical or mental or psychological against the person, the
couple or persons supporting them;
(xiii) Confining any person illegally, or placing them under house
arrest;
(xiv) Confiscation of a person’s phone, laptop and any means of
communication;
(xv) Freezing the bank accounts of the couple or either of them;
(xvi) Causing the termination of the job of the couple or either of
them by their employer;
(xvii) Committing act of sexual violence or sexual harassment
against any person;
(xviii) Forcing or causing an abortion or miscarriage on any woman;
(xix) Forced marriage of either or both persons, who are parties to
an inter-caste marriage, against their consent;
(xx) Forced dissolution of marriage of the couple against their
consent;
(xxi) Spreading hatred or defaming the couple and the family with
false information among the locality or community; and
(xxii) Social and economic boycott.
6. Prohibition of unlawful assembly.- A group of five or more persons shall
not gather, assemble, congregate at any time with the view or intention to deliberate
on, or condemning any marriage on the ground that such marriage has
dishonoured the caste, tribe, community, tradition or is against the wishes of the
family or community.
7. Power of court to issue injunctions.- (1) Any person having exercised or
intending to exercise any of their rights under section 3 may approach a Civil Court
on an apprehension that there will be any interference in the exercise of such rights
from their parents, family members or any other persons, and seek an injunction
preventing such interference and may also seek an order of protection.
(2) On such application, the Court shall issue an injunction against any
person or persons including their parents, family, relatives or any other member
and restrain them from interfering with the rights of the persons and an order of
protection directing the jurisdictional police to protect the person or persons
concerned:
6
Provided that in the case of any urgency, the Court shall have the power to
issue an ad-interim and ex-parte injunction and order of protection, before the
issuance of notice.
(3) On the issuance of the order of protection, it shall be the responsibility of
the police to ensure complete protection to the person or persons concerned and to
take all steps of precaution under the provisions of this Act.
(4) Whoever knowing that an injunction has been issued under sub-section (1)
against him disobeys such injunction shall be punishable with imprisonment of
either description for a term which may extend to two years or with fine which may
extend to one lakh rupees or with both.
8. Killing in the name of ‘Honour’.- Without prejudice to the punishment
provided under the Bharatiya Nyaya Sanhita, whoever causes death through any
means or commits any such act that results in death of a couple or either of them
or any person in the name of ‘honour’ shall be punished with minimum
imprisonment for a term of five years.
9. Grievous hurt and Injury.- (1) Whoever causes grievous hurt to a
couple or either of them in the name of honour shall be punished with
imprisonment for a term which shall not be less than three years and with fine
which may extend to three lakh rupees.
(2) Whoever causes simple hurt to a couple or either of them in the name of
‘honour’ shall be punished with rigorous imprisonment for a term which shall not
be less than two years and with fine which may extend to two lakh rupees.
Explanation: The expression ‘grievous hurt’ and ‘simple hurt’ shall have the
same meaning as is given to it in section 114 and 116 of the Bharatiya Nyaya
Sanhitha, 2023(Central Act 45 of 2023).
10. Crimes in the name of honour or tradition and any other act to
prevent exercise of rights under section 3.- Whoever causes any crimes in the
name of “honour” or tradition as defined in section 5,-
(a) not amounting to killing in the name of “honour” but grievous hurt and
injury, shall be punishable with imprisonment of a term which shall not be
less than two years but which may extend to five years and shall also be
liable to fine which may extend to one lakh rupees.
(b) Any person or persons who commits any act not defined in section 9 and 10
to prevent the exercise of the rights referred in sub-sections(1) and (2) of
section 5 by any person or a group of persons shall be punishable with
imprisonment of a term not less than two years but which may extend to
five years and shall also be liable to fine which may extend to one lakh
rupees.
11. Criminal intimidation.- Any person or persons including any member of
an unlawful assembly indulges in criminal intimidation of any person or persons for
their marriage or any of their relatives or supporters, shall be punishable with
7
imprisonment for a term not less than three years but which may extend to five
years and shall also be liable to fine which may extend to two lakh rupees:
Provided that if the threat be to cause harm or injury of the description
referred to in section 351(3) of the Bharatiya Nyaya Sanhita, 2023 (Central Act 45
of 2023) the maximum imprisonment shall extend to seven years.
Explanation: The expression ‘criminal intimidation’ shall have the same
meaning as is given to it in section 351(1) of the Bharatiya Nyaya Sanhita, 2023
(Central Act 45 of 2023).
12. Unlawful assembly.-Any person or persons participating in any
unlawful assembly as described in section 7 including every member participating
therein directly or indirectly, shall be punishable with imprisonment for a term not
less than six months but which may extend to five years and shall also be liable to
fine which may extend to one lakh rupees.
13. Tampering with evidence.- Whoever knowingly or having reason to
believe that an offence has been committed under this Act causes any evidence of
the commission of that offence to disappear with the intention of screening the
offender from punishment, or with that intention gives any information respecting
the offence which he knows or believes to be false shall be punishable with the
punishment provided for that offence.
14. Punishment for abetment, attempt or conspiracy.- Whoever abets,
attempts or conspires to commit an offence under this Act or encourages or assists
the suicide of any person shall be punished in the same manner as if he had
himself committed that offence.
15. Offences to be cognizable and non-bailable.- Without prejudice to the
provisions anything contained in the Bharathiya Nagarik Suraksha Sanhitha, 2023
(Central Act 46 of 2023), all the offences under this Act shall be cognizable and
non-bailable.
16. Rights of Persons exercising their rights under section 3 and
victims of any offence under this Act.-Any person exercising their rights under
section 3 or being a victim under this Act shall have the right,-
(1) to seek protection for themselves, their dependents, and witnesses against
any kind of intimidation or coercion or inducement or violence or threats of
violence.
(2) to be treated with fairness, respect and dignity and with due regard to any
special need that arises because of the victims age or gender or educational
disadvantage or poverty.
(3) to reasonable, accurate, and timely notice of any Court proceeding
including any bail proceeding; the Public Prosecutor or the State
Government shall inform such person about any proceedings under this
Act.
8
(4) to be heard in any proceeding under this Act in respect of bail, discharge,
release, parole, conviction or sentence of an accused or any connected
proceedings or arguments and file appeal against acquittal, written
submission on conviction, acquittal or sentencing and for this purpose to
engage a legal counsel of their choice.
(5) Without prejudice to anything contained in the Bharathiya Nagarik
Suraksha Sanhitha, 2023(Central Act 46 of 2023), the Court trying a case
under this Act shall provide to a victim, his/her dependents, informant or
witnesses, complete protection to secure the ends of justice;
(6) without prejudice to the generality of the provisions of sub-section (5), the
concerned Special Court may, on an application made by a victim or
his/her dependent, informant or witness in any proceedings before it or by
the Special Public Prosecutor in relation to such victim, informant or
witness or on its own motion, take such measures including,-
(a) concealing the names and addresses of the witnesses in its orders or
judgments or in any records of the case accessible to the public;
(b) issuing directions for non-disclosure of the identity and addresses of
the witnesses;
(c) take immediate action in respect of any complaint relating to
harassment of a victim, informant or witness and on the same day,
if necessary, pass appropriate orders for protection:
Provided that inquiry or investigation into the complaint received under
clause (c) shall be tried separately from the main case by such Court and concluded
within a period of two months from the date of receipt of the complaint.
Provided further that where the complaint under clause (c) is against any
public servant, the Court shall restrain such public servant from interfering with
the victim, informant or witness, as the case may be, in any matter related or
unrelated to the pending case.
(7) the Court shall periodically review the protection being offered to victims
and witnesses and pass appropriate orders to modify any protection
measures if necessary.
17. Duty to provide protection and provision of safe-houses.- (1) It shall
be the duty and responsibility of the State to make arrangements for the protection
of victims, their dependents and witnesses against any kind of intimidation or
coercion or inducement or violence or threats of violence.
(2) Any person or persons can make complaints, file representations or
letters to the Sub-Divisional Magistrate or the District Magistrate or the
jurisdictional police seeking protection from any person or any unlawful assembly
who are likely to or who have been objecting to any marriage.
9
(3) Upon receiving such complaint or representation, the Sub-Divisional
Magistrate or District Magistrate shall immediately take appropriate steps to
provide protection to the said person, including giving appropriate directions for the
same to the police. The police if they receive such a complaint, or request for
protection, shall immediately and not later than 6 hours, provide protection and
safety measures to the said persons, in such manner as they deem fit, but not
limited to finding a shelter home or by any other means.
(4) It shall be the duty of the State Government to provide homes for
couples in need of shelter and a safe place to stay. There should be adequate
security for the protection of these couples in these shelter homes, with due regard
to their privacy. In the safe houses, the couple shall have access and the facilities to
meet with their lawyers or members from any Non Governmental Organization
providing them support and assistance.
(5) The State Government shall establish a safe house at each District
Headquarter for persons whose rights under Section 3 of the Act are under threat.
(6) It shall be the duty of the State Government to frame a scheme for
protection and rehabilitation of victims and witnesses under this Act and such
scheme may include provision of immediate relief.
18. Duty of public servant.- (1) The duties of public servant shall include
to, -
(a) record the complaint of any person, informant, victim or witnesses in
regard to any offence under this Act or any kind of intimidation,
coercion or inducement or violence or threats of violence, whether
given orally or in writing.
(b) read out to an informant the information given orally, and reduced to
writing by the officer in charge of the police station, before taking the
signature of the informant;
(c) register a complaint or a First Information Report under this Act and
other relevant provisions;
(d) furnish a copy of the information so recorded forthwith to the
informant;
(e) record the statement of the victims or witnesses;
(f) conduct the investigation and file charge sheet in the Special Court or
the Exclusive Special Court within a period of sixty days, and to
explain the delay if any, in writing;
(g) correctly prepare, frame and translate any document or electronic
record;
(h) respect the rights of all persons under this Act and take no action that
undermines any such right;
10
(i) perform any other duty specified in this Act or the rules made there
under.
(2) No public servant shall engage in any act that directly or indirectly
impedes, restricts, or undermines any person’s right to exercise their rights
under this Act.
19. Power to prohibit certain acts and taking preventive measures.- If
information about any proposed unlawful assembly or gathering in respect of
crimes to be committed against any particular couple or persons in the name of
honour or tradition, comes to the knowledge of any police officer or any officer of the
District Administration, they shall:
(i) Forthwith intimate the jurisdictional Deputy Superintendent of Police
and Superintendent of Police;
(ii) The District Magistrate shall immediately issue an order prohibiting
the convening of such unlawful assembly and the doing of any act
towards the commission of any offence under this Act by any person
in any area specified there under and such order shall be immediately
published in a local newspaper and delivered to such persons of the
said unlawful assembly;
(iii) The Sub-Divisional Magistrate or District Magistrate may take such
steps as may be necessary to give effect to such order including by
giving appropriate directions to the police authorities concerned;
(iv) The District Magistrate shall also take such steps as may be
necessary to ensure the safety of the persons targeted pursuant to the
illegal decisions taken by the unlawful assembly including preventive
and prohibitory actions under the Bharathiya Nagarik Suraksha
Sanhitha, 2023(Central Act 46 of 2023); and
(v) The District Magistrate/Superintendent of Police shall deal with the
complaint regarding threat administered to such couple/family with
utmost sensitivity. If necessary, they may be provided logistical
support for solemnizing their marriage and/or for being duly
registered under police protection, if they so desire. After the
marriage, if the couple so desire, they can be provided accommodation
on payment of nominal charges in the safe house initially for a period
of one month to be extended on monthly basis but not exceeding
one year in aggregate, depending on their threat assessment on a
case-to-case basis.
20. Failure to perform duty under the Act.- Whoever, being a public
servant, wilfully neglects his duties required to be performed by him under this Act
and the rules made there under, shall be liable for departmental proceedings.
11
21. Mandatory reporting.- (1) All State government officers are required
and empowered to assist the police in the execution of the provisions of this Act or
any rule or order made hereunder.
(2) All village officers and such other officers as may be specified by the
Deputy Commissioner in relation to any area and the inhabitants of such area
shall, if they have reason to believe or have the knowledge that any of the offences
mentioned under this Act are about to be, or have been committed in the area shall
mandatorily report such fact to the nearest police station forthwith.
(3) Whoever contravenes the provisions of sub-section (1) or sub-section (2)
shall be punishable with imprisonment of either description for a term which may
extend to two years and shall also be liable to fine.
22. Duties of the State Government to ensure effective implementation
of the Act.- (1) The State Government shall forthwith identify Districts,
Sub-Divisions and/or villages where instances of crimes in the name of honour or
tradition have been reported in the last five years.
(2) The Principal Secretary, Department of Law, Justice, Human Rights shall
issue directives/advisories to the Superintendent of Police of the concerned
Districts for ensuring that the Officers In charge of the Police Stations of the
identified areas are extra cautious if any instance of inter-caste marriage within
their jurisdiction comes to their notice.
(3) The Department of Law, Justice, Human Rights shall take measures to
create awareness and sensitize law enforcement agencies, government departments
and the police by involving all the stake holders to identify the measures for
prevention of crimes in the name of honour and to implement this legislation;
(4) The Government shall create a Special Cell for prevention of crimes in the
name of ‘honour’ or “tradition” in every District comprising of the Superintendent of
Police, the District Social Welfare Officer to receive petitions/complaints of
harassment of and threat to couples of inter-caste marriages and any person
exercising their right under section 3.
(5) These Special Cells shall establish a 24-hour helpline to receive and
register such complaints and to provide necessary assistance/advice and protection
to the couple.
23. Constitution of monitoring committees.- (1) In each district, the
District Magistrate shall set up a monitoring committee to review the
implementation of the provisions of the Act, relief and rehabilitation facilities
provided to the victims and other matters connected therewith, prosecution of cases
under the Act, role of different officers/agencies responsible for implementing the
provisions of the Act and various reports received by the District Administration.
(2) The district-level monitoring committee shall consist of Superintendent
of Police, three Group ‘A’ officers/ Gazette officers of the State Government and
three members having association with non-Government Organizations.
12
(3) The District-level committee shall meet at least once in three months.
(4) The State Government shall take all measures as may be necessary for
the effective implementation of this Act. Such measures may include,-
(i) The provision for adequate facilities, including legal aid, to the persons
subjected to honour crimes to enable them to avail themselves of
justice;
(ii) provision for a periodic survey of the working of the provisions of this
Act with a view to suggesting measures for the better implementation
of the provision of this Act.
24. Eva Nammava Vedike.- (1) In each district, the District Magistrate shall
constitute an "Eva Nammava Vedike."
(2) The Eva Nammava vedike shall consist of retired judge, police officer,
revenue officer, sub-registrar and such other members as may be prescribed.
(3) The Eva Nammava Vedike shall facilitate solemnisation of marriage,
provide counseling services and perform such other functions as may be prescribed.
25. Establishment of special fast track courts.- (1) The State Government,
may after consultation with the High Court, by notification, designate a District
Courts as Special Fast Track Court for the purpose of trying the cases pertaining to
crimes in the name of honour and offences under this Act.
(2) Such Special Fast Track Court shall exercise all jurisdiction exercisable
by the District Court under any law for the time being in force in respect of any
proceedings under this Act:
Provided that the Courts so established or specified shall have power to
directly take cognizance of offences under this Act.
(3) It shall be the duty of the State Government to establish adequate
number of Courts to ensure that cases under this Act are disposed of within a
period of two months, as far as possible.
(4) The concerned District Judge presiding over a designated Special Fast
Track Court shall receive prior training on this Act, in such manner as may be
prescribed.
(5) In every trial in the Special Court, the proceedings shall be continued
from day-to-day until all the witnesses in attendance have been examined, unless
the Special Court finds the adjournment of the same beyond the following day to be
necessary for reasons to be recorded in writing:
Provided that when the trial relates to an offence under this Act, the trial
shall, as far as possible, be completed within a period of two months from the date
of filing of the charge sheet.
26. Appeals.- (1) Without prejudice to the provisions of Bharathiya Nagarik
Suraksha Sanhitha, 2023 (Central Act 46 of 2023), or in any other law an appeal
shall lie from every judgment or order under this Act to the High Court.
13
(2) Every appeal under this Section shall be preferred within a period of
ninety days from the date of the judgment or order under this Act:
Provided that the High Court may entertain an appeal after the expiry of the
said period of ninety days if it is satisfied that the appellant had sufficient cause for
not preferring the appeal within the period of ninety days:
(3) Every appeal preferred under sub-section (1) shall, as far as possible, be
disposed of within a period of three months from the date of admission of the
appeal.
27. Application of Bharathiya Nagarik Suraksha Sanhitha, 2023.- Save as
otherwise provided in this Act, the provisions of the Bharathiya Nagarik Suraksha
Sanhitha, 2023 (Central Act 46 of 2023) shall apply to the proceedings under this
Act.
28. Act to be in addition to other laws.- Save as otherwise provided in this
Act, the provisions of this Act shall be in addition to and not in derogation to the
provisions of any other law for the time being in force.
29. Power to make rules.- (1) The State Government may after previous
Publication in the Official Gazette, make rules for carrying out the provisions of
this Act.
(2) Every rule made under this Act shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is
made, before each house of the State legislature, while it is in session for a total
period of thirty days which may be comprised in one session or in two or more
successive sessions, and if, before the expiry of the session immediately following
the session or the successive sessions aforesaid, both the Legislative Assembly and
Legislative Council agree in making any modification in the rule or both agree that
the rule should not be made, the rule shall thereafter have effect only in such
modified form or be of no effect, as the case may be; so, however, that any such
modification or annulment shall be without prejudice to the validity of anything
previously done under that rule.
14
STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
Whereas the persistence of caste-based discrimination in the State of
Karnataka continues to manifest in brutal forms of violence, including honour
killings, particularly against young adults who exercise their constitutional right to
choose their life partners through inter-caste marriages.
And whereas while offences like murder, assault, and criminal intimidation
are punishable under the Bharatiya Nyaya Sanhita,2023 (Central Act 45 of 2023)
these provisions do not adequately address the specific social motive of preserving
perceived “caste honour” or the wide range of coercive practices employed from
performing death rituals (thithi) for living daughters, denying lawful inheritance
rights, social ostracism, to insidious attempts at causing harm through poisoning
or other covert means. Such acts not only violate fundamental rights guaranteed
under Articles 14, 15, 19, and 21 of the Constitution of India but also undermine
the vision of social reformers like Sree Basavanna and Dr|| B.R. Ambedkar, who
advocated inter-caste marriages as a means to eradicate caste hierarchy.
And Whereas Existing laws lack proactive mechanisms for protection of at-
risk couples, mandatory police intervention, fast-track adjudication, and
restoration of civil rights such as inheritance. In the absence of a dedicated
legislation, perpetrators often escape stringent punishment and victims or survivors
receive inadequate relief and rehabilitation.
And Whereas The Constitution of India enshrines the principle of fraternity as
essential to securing the dignity of the individual and the unity and integrity of the
nation and this principle demands the eradication of caste-based discrimination
and the promotion of social solidarity through the recognition and protection of
inter-caste marriages.
Therefore, it is considered necessary to make a legislation to,-
(i) provide freedom of choice in marriage and prevention and prohibition of
caste based crimes;
(ii) prevent violation of human rights;
(iii) bring honour to inter-caste marriage;
(iv) prevent enforced caste based discrimination in individual choices; and
(v) constitute eva nammava eva nammava vedike to solemnise inter-caste
marriages.
Hence, the Bill.
15
FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM
There is no financial implication involved in the proposed legislative measure.
16
MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION
Clause -24 (i) sub-clause (2), empowers the State Government to prescribe
the manner for inclusion of members to Eva Nammava
Vedike.
(ii) Sub-clause (3), empowers the State Government to prescribe
the functions of Eva Nammava Vedike.
Clause-25 Sub-clause (4), empowers the State Government to prescribe the
manner of training to District Judge presiding over a designated
Special Fast Track Court under this Act.
Clause-29 Clause 29 empowers the State Government to prescribe by rules
to carry out provisions of the Act.
H.K. PATIL
Minister for Law, Justice and Human Rights
and Parliamentary Affairs and Legislation and
Tourism
M.K. VISHALAKSHI
Secretary
Karnataka Legislative Assembly
Govt. Press, Vikasa Soudha, Bengaluru, 17th March, 2026, P7, W.D. , Copies 500+100
