KARNATAKA LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY
SIXTEENTH LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY
NINTH SESSION
(Adjourned Meetings)
THE KARNATAKA TAX ON PROFESSION, TRADES, CALLINGS AND
EMPLOYMENTS (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2026
(LA Bill No. 08 of 2026)
A Bill further to amend the Karnataka Tax on Profession, Trades, Callings
and Employments Act, 1976.
Whereas, it is expedient further to amend the Karnataka Tax on Profession,
Trades, Callings and Employments Act, 1976 (Karnataka Act 35 of 1976), for the
purposes hereinafter appearing;
Be it enacted by Karnataka State Legislature in the Seventy seventh year of
the Republic of India as follows.-
1. Short title and commencement.- (1) This Act may be called the
Karnataka Tax on Profession, Trades, Callings and Employments (Amendment)
Act, 2026.
(2) It shall come into force with effect from the first day of April, 2026.
2. Amendment of section 10.- In the Karnataka Tax on Profession, Trades,
Callings and Employments Act, 1976 (Karnataka Act 35 of 1976), in section 10, in
sub-section (1), after the second proviso the following provisos shall be inserted,
namely:-
“Provided also that, every enrolled person who has paid the tax payable by
him under this Act for a year shall be deemed to have furnished the return for that
year.
Provided also that, the Commissioner may, by notification, exempt any class
of enrolled persons from furnishing the return, subject to such conditions and
safeguards as may be specified in such notification.”
2
STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
The Karnataka Tax on Professions, Trades, Callings and Employments Act
1976 (Karnataka Act 35 of 1976) provides for levy and collection of tax on
professions, trades, callings and employments and also prescribes procedural
requirements for enrolment and filing at returns by enrolled persons.
Under the existing provisions of section 10 of the said Act, every enrolled
person is required to furnish a return, even in cases where the enrolled person has
paid the maximum tax prescribed under the said Act for the relevant year. This has
resulted in avoidable compliance burden on taxpayers and unnecessary
administrative processing by the Commercial Tax Department, without any
corresponding revenue benefit.
With a view to simplifying compliance, reducing paperwork, and facilitating
ease of doing business, it is proposed to deem the furnishing of return in cases
where an enrolled person has paid the tax payable by him under the Act for a year.
Further, it is also proposed to empower the Commissioner to exempt, by
notification, specified classes of enrolled persons from furnishing returns, subject to
such conditions and safeguards as may be specified in the notification.
Proposed amendment seeks to streamline tax administration, improve
voluntary compliance, and enable efficient deployment of departmental resources.
Hence, the Bill.
3
FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM
There is no extra expenditure involved in the proposed Legislative measure.
SIDDARAMAIAH
Chief Minister and
Minister for Finance
M.K. VISHALAKSHI
Secretary
Karnataka Legislative Assembly
4
ANNEXURE
EXTRACT FROM THE KARNATAKA TAX ON PROFESSION, TRADES, CALLINGS AND
EMPLOYMENTS ACT, 1976 (KARNATAKA ACT 35 OF 1976)
XXX XXX XXX
10. Payment of Tax and filing of return by enrolled persons and
deduction of tax in the case of certain enrolled persons.- (1) Every enrolled
person shall pay the tax payable by him under this Act and file his return before
the assessing authority, in such manner and such form as may be prescribed.
Provided that, a person liable to be enrolled shall be deemed to have enrolled
for the purpose of payment of tax under this Act, notwithstanding that he has failed
to do so.
Provided further that, the specified class of enrolled persons as may be
notified by the Commissioner shall pay the tax payable, by electronic remittance
through internet and also submit the return in the prescribed form, electronically
through internet, in the manner specified in the said notification.
(2) The amount of tax due from enrolled persons for each year as specified in
their enrolment certificates shall be paid,-
(a) in respect of a person who Before 30th April of that
stands enrolled before the year
commencement of a year;
(b) in respect of a person who is Within one month from the
enrolled after the date of enrolment.
commencement of a year.
Govt. Press, Vikasa Soudha, Bengaluru, 16th March, 2026, P7, W.D. , Copies 500+100
