AS INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA
Bill No. 108 of 2025
THE JAN VISHWAS (AMENDMENT OF PROVISIONS) BILL, 2025
A
BILL
to amend certain enactments for decriminalising and rationalising offences to
further enhance trust-based governance for ease of living and doing business.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Seventy-sixth Year of the Republic of India
as follows:—
1. (1) This Act may be called the Jan Vishwas (Amendment of Provisions) Short title and
Act, 2025. commencement.
5 (2) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by
notification in the Official Gazette, appoint; and different dates may be appointed
for amendments relating to different enactments mentioned in the Schedule.
2. The enactments mentioned in column (4) of the Schedule are hereby Amendment of
amended to the extent and in the manner mentioned in column (5) thereof. certain
enactments.
2
Revision of fines 3. The fines and penalties provided under various provisions in the enactments
and penalties.
mentioned in the Schedule shall be increased by ten per cent. of the minimum
amount of fine or penalty, as the case may be, prescribed therefor, after the expiry
of every three years from the date of commencement of this Act:
Provided that notwithstanding anything contained in this section, if any 5
enactment mentioned in the Schedule provides the manner of revision of fines and
penalties therein, only the said provision shall be applicable for increase of fines and
penalties for provisions of such enactment.
Savings. 4. The amendment or repeal by this Act of any enactment shall not affect any
other enactment in which the amended or repealed enactment has been applied, 10
incorporated or referred to;
and this Act shall not affect the validity, invalidity, effect or consequences of
anything already done or suffered, or any right, title, obligation or liability already
acquired, accrued or incurred or any remedy or proceeding in respect thereof, or any
release or discharge of, or from any debt, penalty, obligation, liability, claim or 15
demand, or any indemnity already granted, or the proof of any past act or thing;
nor shall this Act affect any principle or rule of law, or established jurisdiction,
form or course of pleading, practice or procedure, or existing usage, custom,
privilege, restriction, exemption, office or appointment, despite the fact that the
same respectively may have been in any manner affirmed, or recognised or derived 20
by, in or from any enactment hereby amended or repealed;
nor shall the amendment or repeal by this Act of any enactment revive or
restore any jurisdiction, office, custom, liability, right, title, privilege, restriction,
exemption, usage, practice, procedure or other matter or thing not now existing or
in force. 25
Power to remove 5. (1) If any difficulty arises in giving effect to the provisions of different
difficulties. enactments mentioned in the Schedule as amended by this Act, the Central
Government may, by order published in the Official Gazette, make such provisions,
not inconsistent with the provisions of the enactments as amended by this Act, as
appear to it to be necessary or expedient for removing the difficulty: 30
Provided that no such order shall be made after the expiry of a period of two
years from the date of commencement of this Act.
(2) Every order made under sub-section (1) shall, as soon as may be after it is
made, be laid before each House of Parliament.
3
THE SCHEDULE
(See section 2)
Sl. No. Year No. Short title Amendments
(1) (2) (3) (4) (5)
1. 1934 2 The Reserve (A)In section 58B,––
Bank of India
(i) in the marginal heading, for the word
Act, 1934 “Penalties”, the word “Offences” shall be substituted;
(ii)sub-section (2) shall be omitted;
(iii)sub-section (4AA) shall be omitted.
(B)In section 58G,––
(i)in the marginal heading, for the word “fine”, the
word “penalties” shall be substituted;
(ii)after sub-section (1), the following sub-section
shall be inserted, namely:––
“(1A) If any non-banking financial company
fails to,—
(a) produce any book, account or other
document; or
(b) furnish any statement, information or
particulars which, by or under this Act, order,
regulation or direction, it is the duty of such
company to produce or furnish; or
(c) answer any question put to it while
exercising powers under the provisions of this
Act or of any order, regulation or direction,
the Bank may impose on such non-banking
financial company a penalty not exceeding one
lakh rupees in respect of each offence, and if it
persists in such failure or refusal, a further penalty
not exceeding five thousand rupees for every day
after the first, during which the default continues.”;
(iii)in sub-section (2), after the words, brackets and
figure “under sub-section (1),” the words, brackets,
figure and letter “or sub-section (1A)” shall be inserted.
2. 1940 23 The Drugs In section 33-I, in sub-section (2), for the words
and “with imprisonment for a term which may extend to
Cosmetics six months and with fine which shall not be less than
ten thousand rupees”, the words “with fine which
Act, 1940
shall not be less than thirty thousand rupees” shall
be substituted.
3. 1948 61 The Central (A)In section 14, in sub-section (1),––
Silk Board
(i)clause (b) shall be omitted;
Act, 1948
(ii)in the long line, for the words “punishable with
imprisonment for a term which may extend to one
year, or with fine which may extend to one thousand
rupees, or with both”, the words “warned at the first
instance, and in case of continuing or repeated
offences, he shall be liable to a penalty of not less than
3
4
(1) (2) (3) (4) (5)
twenty-five thousand rupees but may extend to one
lakh rupees” shall be substituted.
(B) After section 14A, the following section shall be
inserted, namely:––
“14B. Adjudication of penalties.––(1) For the
purpose of adjudicating penalties under clauses (a) and
(c) of sub-section (1) of section 14, the Central
Government shall appoint an adjudicating officer for
holding an inquiry and imposing penalties in such
manner as may be prescribed.
(2) Whosoever is aggrieved by an order of the
adjudicating officer under sub-section (1), may prefer
an appeal to the Appellate Authority who shall be
appointed by the Central Government, within a period
of sixty days from the date of receipt of such order in
such form and manner as may be prescribed.”.
4. 1950 64 The Road In section 46,––
Transport
(i)for the words “punishable with fine”, the words
Corporations
“liable to a penalty” shall be substituted;
Act, 1950
(ii) for the words “with a further fine”, the words
“with a further penalty” shall be substituted.
5. 1953 29 The Tea Act, (A) In section 37, for the words “punishable with fine
1953 which may extend to one thousand rupees”, the words
“warned at the first instance, and in case of subsequent
contraventions, he shall be liable to a penalty which may
extend to one lakh rupees” shall be substituted.
(B)In section 42A, in sub-section (1),––
(i)for the words, brackets and figures “sub-section
(1) of section 41”, the words, figures and brackets
“section 37, sub-section (1) of section 41” shall be
substituted;
(ii)after the words “an adjudicating officer for”, the
words “issuing warning letter or” shall be inserted.
6. 1953 45 The Coir Sections 20 and 21 shall be omitted.
Industry Act,
1953
7. 1957 66 The Delhi (A)In section 123D,—
Municipal (i) after clause (a), the following proviso shall be
Corporation inserted, namely:—
Act, 1957
“Provided that no such assessment for an
assessment year shall be made after the lapse of
seven years from the close of that assessment year;”;
(ii)for clauses (b) and (c), the following clause shall
be substituted, namely:—
“(b) revise any assessment where the
information furnished in the return of
self-assessment is found to be incorrect or reopen
any assessment where it has been detected that there
is wilful suppression of information; and”;
5
(1) (2) (3) (4) (5)
(iii) in clause (d), for brackets and letter “(d)”, the
brackets and letter “(c)” shall be substituted.
(B) In section 153, in sub-section (1), for the proviso,
the following provisos shall be substituted, namely:—
“Provided that such bill shall be presented in
respect of a property tax due in respect of a property
after carrying out physical survey or collection of
relevant data in respect of that property if it is being
assessed for the first time:
Provided further that no such bill shall be necessary
in the case of—
(a) a tax on vehicles and animals; and
(b) a theatre-tax.”.
(C) Section 310 shall be omitted.
(D) In section 330, sub-sections (1) and (2) shall be
omitted.
(E) In section 337, sub-section (4) shall be omitted.
(F) In section 347D,––
(i) in sub-section (1), for the word “Administrator”,
the words “District Judge” shall be substituted;
(ii) for sub-section (3), the following sub-section
shall be substituted, namely:—
“(3) An appeal against the order of the District
Judge shall lie to the High Court of Delhi.”.
(G) In section 355, sub-section (2) shall be omitted.
(H) In section 361, sub-sections (1) and (3) shall be
omitted.
(I) In section 396, sub-sections (1) and (2) shall be
omitted.
(J) Section 400 shall be omitted.
(K) Section 401 shall be omitted.
(L) Section 409 shall be omitted.
(M) Section 410 shall be omitted.
(N) Section 414 shall be omitted.
(O) In section 437,—
(i) in the marginal heading, the words “or
molestation” shall be omitted;
(ii) the words “or molest” shall be omitted.
(P) In section 461, in sub-section (1),––
(i) in clause (a), for the words “in the Twelfth
Schedule”, the words and letter “in Part-A of the
Twelfth Schedule” shall be substituted;
(ii) in clause (b),––
(A) in sub-clause (i), for the words “said Table”,
the words and letter “said Table in Part-A of the
Twelfth Schedule” shall be substituted;
6
(1) (2) (3) (4) (5)
(B)in sub-clause (ii), for the words “that Table”,
the words and letter “that Table in Part-A of the
Twelfth Schedule” shall be substituted.
(Q) After section 461, the following section shall be
inserted, namely:––
“461A. Penalty for certain violations.––Whoever—
(a) contravenes any provision of any of the
sections, sub-sections, clauses, provisos or other
provisions of this Act mentioned in column (1)
of the Table in Part-B of the Twelfth
Schedule; or
(b) fails to comply with any order or
direction lawfully given to him or any
requisition lawfully made upon him under
any of the said sections, sub-sections, clauses,
provisos or other provisions, shall be
punishable with a penalty specified in that
behalf in column (3) of the said Table in Part-B
of the Twelfth Schedule and daily penalty
specified in column (4) for continuing
contravention after adjudication for the first
such contravention or failure:
Provided that before invoking the
sub-sections (1) and (2) of section 323,
section 353, section 354, sub-sections (1), (2) and
(3)of section 357, sub-section (1) of section 370,
section 375, sub-sections (1) and (2) of section
387, sub-sections (4) and (5) of section 399,
sub-section (1) of section 406, sub-section (3) of
section 418, section 420 and sub-section (5) of
section 430, for the first contravention of the said
sections, a warning notice shall be issued to the
offender.”.
(R) For section 465, the following section shall be
substituted, namely:—
“465. General penalty.—Whoever, in any case in
which a penalty or fine is not expressly provided by
this Act, fails to comply with any notice, order, or as
the case may be, requisition issued under any
provision thereof, or otherwise contravenes any of the
provisions of this Act, shall in the first instance be
liable to a penalty of five hundred rupees, and in the
case of continuing failure or contravention, shall also
be liable to a penalty of fifty rupees for every day after
the first contravention during which he has persisted
in the failure or contravention:
Provided that the procedure for imposing the
penalty shall be in such manner as provided under
section 468A of this Act.”.
7
(1) (2) (3) (4) (5)
(S) In section 466A,––
(i) in the opening portion, for the words, figures
and brackets “The Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973
(2 of 1974)”, the words, figures and brackets “The
Bharatiya Nagarik Suraksha Sanhita, 2023 (46 of
2023)” shall be substituted;
(ii) in the long line (b),––
(a) after the words “cognizable offence”,
the words “notwithstanding anything contained
in any law for the time being in force, the offences
in clauses (a) and (b) above shall be cognizable
only if a complaint is filed by an officer not below
the rank of Deputy Commissioner as may be
authorised as such by the Administrator” shall be
inserted;
(b) in sub-clause (1), for the words and figures
“section 42 of that Code”, the words and figures
“section 39 of that Sanhita” shall be substituted;
(c) in sub-clause (2), for the word “appointed”,
the word “authorised” shall be substituted.
(T) After section 468, the following sections shall be
inserted, namely:––
“468A. Adjudication of penalties.––(1) The
Commissioner may authorise an officer not below the
rank of Assistant Commissioner as an adjudicating
officer for holding an inquiry and imposing penalties
specified under Part-B of the Twelfth Schedule, in
such manner as may be prescribed, after giving the
parties a reasonable opportunity of being heard.
(2) The adjudicating officer may summon and
enforce the attendance of noticee, or, as the case may
be, any person acquainted with the facts and
circumstances of the case, to give evidence or to
produce any document, which in the opinion of the
adjudicating officer may be useful for or relevant to
the subject matter of the inquiry and if, on such
inquiry, adjudicating officer is satisfied that the person
concerned has contravened the provisions of this Act,
may impose the penalty as specified under Part-B of
the Twelfth Schedule.
468B. Appeal.––(1) The Commissioner may
authorise an officer not less than one rank above the
adjudicating officer to act as an appellate authority.
(2) Whosoever aggrieved by an order of the
adjudicating officer under section 468A may prefer an
appeal to the appellate authority, within a period of
thirty days from the date of receipt of the order.
(3) The appellate authority may summon and
enforce the attendance of any person acquainted with
the facts and circumstances of the case to give
evidence or to produce any document.
8
(1) (2) (3) (4) (5)
(4) The appellate authority may, after giving the
parties to the appeal an opportunity of being heard,
pass such order as it thinks fit, either confirming or
modifying or setting aside the order appealed against.
(5) The appellate authority shall dispose of the
appeal within six months from the date of filing of
such appeal.
(6) The amount of penalty imposed under this Act,
if not paid, may be recovered as an arrear of tax.”.
(U) In section 474, in sub-section (1), after the words
“Any police officer may”, the words “, on a complaint
made by an officer not below the rank of Deputy
Commissioner as may be authorised as such by the
Administrator,” shall be inserted.
(V) For section 475, the following section shall be
substituted, namely:—
“475. Duties of police officers.—It shall be the duty
of all police officers to assist all municipal officers and
other municipal employees in the exercise of their
lawful authority under this Act or any rule, regulation
or bye-law made thereunder.”.
(W) For section 482, the following section shall be
substituted, namely:––
“482. Penalty for breaches of bye-laws.—(1) Any
bye-law made under this Act may provide that a
contravention thereof shall be liable to a—
(a) penalty which may extend to five hundred
rupees; or
(b) penalty which may extend to five hundred
rupees and in the case of a continuing contravention,
with an additional penalty which may extend to fifty
rupees for every day during which such
contravention continues after adjudication for the
first such contravention; or
(c) penalty which may extend to fifty rupees for
every day during which the contravention continues,
after the receipt of a notice from the Commissioner
or any municipal officer duly authorised in that
behalf, by the person contravening the bye-law
requiring such person to discontinue such
contravention:
Provided that the procedure for levying the penalty
shall be in such manner as provided under section 468A.
(2) Any such bye-law may also provide that a person
contravening the same shall be required to remedy so
far as lies in his power, the mischief, if any, caused by
such contravention.”.
(X) For the Twelfth Schedule, the following Schedule
shall be substituted, namely:––
9
(1) (2) (3) (4) (5)
‘THE TWELFTH SCHEDULE
PART-A
(See section 461)
PUNISHMENTS
Explanation.—The entries in column (2) of the Table below under the
heading “Subject” are not intended as definitions of the offences prescribed
in the provisions mentioned in column (1) of the Table or even as abstracts
of those provisions, but are inserted merely as reference to the subject
thereof.
TABLE
Section, Subject Fine (in Rupees)/ Daily fine
sub-section, imprisonment (in Rupees)
clause or
proviso
(1) (2) (3) (4)
Section 143. Prohibition of 200 50
advertisement without
permission.
Section 313, Utilising, selling or Rigorous …
sub-section (5). otherwise dealing with imprisonment which
any land or laying out a may extend to three
private street otherwise years.
than in conformity with
orders of the Standing
Committee.
Section 317, Prohibition of Simple …
sub-section (1). projections upon streets, imprisonment which
etc. may extend to six
months or with
fine which may
extend to Rs. 5,000
or with both.
Section 317, Failure to comply 200 …
sub-section (2). with requisition to
remove projections
from streets.
Section 320, Erection, etc., of Simple …
sub-section (1). structures of fixtures imprisonment which
which cause obstruction may extend to six
in streets. months or with fine
which may extend to
Rs. 5,000 or with
both.
Section 321. Deposit, etc., of Simple …
things in streets. imprisonment which
may extend to six
months or with fine
which may extend to
Rs. 5,000 or with
both.
10
(1) (2) (3) (4) (5)
(1) (2) (3) (4)
Section 325, Streets not to be Simple …
sub-section (1). opened or broken up and imprisonment
building materials not to which may extend
be deposited thereon to six months or
without permission. with fine which
may extend to
Rs. 5,000 or with
both.
Section 332. Erection of a Simple …
building without the imprisonment
sanction of the which may extend
Commissioner. to six months or
with fine which
may extend to
Rs. 5,000 or with
both.
Section 333, Failure to give notice Simple …
sub-section (1). of intention to erect a imprisonment
building. which may extend
to six months or
with fine which
may extend to
Rs. 5,000 or with
both.
Section 334, Failure to give notice Simple …
sub-section (1). of intention to make imprisonment which
additions, etc., to may extend to six
building. months or with fine
which may extend to
Rs. 5,000 or with
both.
Section 339. Failure to comply Simple …
with requisition to imprisonment which
round off buildings at may extend to six
corners of streets. months or with fine
which may extend to
Rs. 5,000 or with
both.
Section 343. Failure to demolish Simple …
buildings erected imprisonment
without sanction or which may extend
erection of buildings in to six months or
contravention of order. with fine which
may extend to
Rs. 5,000 or with
both.
Section 344. Erection of buildings Simple …
in contravention of imprisonment
conditions of sanction, which may extend
etc. to six months or
with fine which
may extend to
Rs. 5,000 or with
both.
11
(1) (2) (3) (4) (5)
(1) (2) (3) (4)
Section 345. Failure to carry out Simple …
alterations. imprisonment which
may extend to six
months or with fine
which may extend to
Rs. 5,000 or with
both.
Section 347. Non-compliance Simple …
with restrictions on user imprisonment
of buildings. which may extend
to six months or
with fine which
may extend to
Rs. 5,000 or with
both.
Section 365, Failure to comply 1,000 …
sub-section (2). with requisition for
removal of congested
buildings.
Section 366. Failure to comply 1,000 …
with requisition to
improve buildings unfit
for human habitation.
Section 368, Failure to comply 1,000 …
sub-sections with order of
(1), (2), (3) and demolition of buildings
(4). unfit for human
habitation.
Section 397, Commission of 50 …
sub-sections nuisances.
(1), (2) and (3).
Section 416. Establishment of 5,000 500
factory, etc., without
permission.
Section 417. Certain things not to 1,000 100
be kept and certain
trades and operations
not to be carried on
without a licence.
Section 419, Use of premises in 500 …
sub-section (5). contravention of
declaration.
Section 421. Keeping a lodging 100 …
house, eating house, tea
shop, etc., without
licence or contrary to
licence.
Section 422. Keeping open theatre, 500 50
circus or other place of
public amusement
without licence or
contrary to terms of
licence.
12
(1) (2) (3) (4) (5)
(1) (2) (3) (4)
Section 456, Failure of occupier 200 50
sub-section (3). of land or building to
afford owner facilities
for complying with
provisions of the Act,
etc., after eight days
from issue of order by
District Judge.
PART-B
(See section 461A)
PENALTIES
Explanation.—The entries in column (2) of the Table below under the
heading “Subject” are not intended as definitions of the offences prescribed
in the provisions mentioned in column (1) of the Table or even as abstracts
of those provisions, but are inserted merely as reference to the subject
thereof.
TABLE
Section, Subject Penalty D aily
sub-section, (in Rupees) Penalty (in
clause or Rupees)
proviso
(1) (2) (3) (4)
Section 128, Failure to give notice 50 ..
sub-sections (1) of transfer or devolution
and (2). of land or building.
Section 128, Failure to produce 200 ..
sub-section (3). instrument of transfer.
Section 129. Failure to give notice 100 ..
of erection of new
building, etc.
Section 130. Failure to give notice 100 ..
of demolition or removal
of building.
Section 135, Wilful delay or 100 ..
sub-section (2). obstruction of valuers.
Section 172, Non-compliance with 200 ..
sub-section (2). the requisition of
attendance before the
Commissioner.
Section 175. Failure to disclose 100 ..
liability.
Section 305, Construction of 1,000 100
sub-section (3). building within the
regular line of street
without permission.
13
(1) (2) (3) (4) (5)
(1) (2) (3) (4)
Section 307. Failure to comply 200 50
with requisition to set
back buildings to regular
line of street.
Section 314, Failure to comply 200 50
sub-section (1), with requisition to show
clauses (a) and cause for alteration
(b). of street or for
appearance before the
Commissioner.
Section 315, Failure to comply 100 50
sub-section (1). with requisition on
owner of private street or
owner of adjoining land
or building to level, etc.,
such street.
Section 318, Failure to comply 200 ..
sub-section (2). with requisition to
remove a verandah,
balcony, etc., put up
in accordance with
section 317(1).
Section 319. Failure to comply 50 ..
with requisition to have
ground floor doors, etc.,
so altered as not to open
outwards.
Section 323, Tethering of animals 1,000 50
sub-sections (1) and milking of cattle in
and (2). public streets.
Section 324, Unlawful removal of 100 ..
sub-section (4). bar or shoring timber,
etc., or removal or
extinction of light.
Section 327, Name of street and 1,000 ..
sub-section (2). number of house not
to be destroyed or
defaced, etc.
Section 328, Failure to comply with 200 50
sub-section (1). requisition to repair,
protect or enclose a
dangerous place.
Section 340, Erection of buildings 1,000 ..
sub-section (1). on new streets without
leveling.
Section 340, Erection of buildings 1,000 ..
sub-section (2). or execution of work
within regular line of
street or in contravention
of any scheme or plan.
14
(1) (2) (3) (4) (5)
(1) (2) (3) (4)
Section 342. Use of inflammable 1,000 ..
materials without
permission.
Section 346, Non-compliance with 1,000 100
sub-sections (1) provision as to
and (2). completion certificates,
occupation or use, etc.,
without permission.
Section 348, Failure to comply 500 50
sub-sections (1) with requisition to
and (2). remove structures which
are in ruins or likely to
fall.
Section 349, Failure to comply 1,000 ..
sub-section (1). with requisition to
vacate buildings in
dangerous condition, etc.
Section 353. Failure to provide 500 ..
for collection, removal
and deposit of refuse
and provision of
receptacles.
Section 354. Failure to collect and 500 ..
remove filth and
polluted matter.
Section 356. Failure to comply 500 ..
with requisition for
removal of rubbish, etc.,
from premises used as
market, etc.
Section 357, Keeping rubbish and 100 25
sub-section (1). filth for more than
twenty-four hours, etc.
Section 357, Allowing filth to flow 200 ..
sub-section (2). in streets.
Section 357, Depositing rubbish or 200 ..
sub-section (3). filth, etc., in street, etc.
Section 360, Latrines and urinals 200 ..
sub-section (1). not to be constructed
without permission or in
contravention of terms
prescribed.
Section 362. Failure to provide 500 100
latrines for premises
used by large number of
people and to keep them
clean and in proper
order.
15
(1) (2) (3) (4) (5)
(1) (2) (3) (4)
Section 363. Failure to comply 500 100
with requisition to
provide latrines for
market, cattle shed, cart
stand, etc., and to keep
them clean and in proper
order.
Section 364, Failure to comply 500 50
clauses (a), with requisition to
(b), (c) and enforce provision of
(d). latrine or urinal
accommodation, etc.
Section 369. Failure to comply 500 50
with requisition of
the Commissioner to
remove insanitary huts
and sheds, etc.
Section 370, Prohibition against 100 ..
sub-section (1). washing by washerman.
Section 371. Failure to give 100 ..
information of
dangerous disease.
Section 373. Failure to comply 200 ..
with requisition to
cleanse and disinfect
buildings or articles.
Section 374. Failure to comply 200 ..
with requisition to
destroy infectious huts or
sheds.
Section 375. Washing of clothing, 50 ..
bedding, etc., at any
place not notified by
the Commissioner.
Section 377, Sending infected 50 ..
sub-section (1). clothes to washerman or
laundry.
Section 377, Failure to furnish 50 ..
sub-section (2). address of washerman or
laundry to which clothes
have been sent.
Section 378, Use of Public 100 ..
sub-sections conveyances by persons
(1), (2) and (3). suffering from a
dangerous disease, etc.
Section 380. Failure to disinfect 100 ..
buildings before letting
the same.
16
(1) (2) (3) (4) (5)
(1) (2) (3) (4)
Section 381. Disposal of infected 100 ..
articles without
disinfection.
Section 382. Making or selling of 100 ..
food, etc., or washing
of clothes by infected
persons.
Section 383. Sale of food or drink 100 ..
in contravention of
restriction or prohibition
of the Commissioner.
Section 384. Removal or use of 100 ..
water from wells and
tanks in contravention
of prohibition of
Commissioner.
Section 385. Exposure of persons 200 ..
to risk of infection by
the presence or conduct
of a person suffering
from a dangerous
disease, etc.
Section 386. Removal of infectious 200 ..
corpses in contravention
of the provisions of the
section.
Section 387, Absence of sweepers, 500 ..
sub-sections (1) etc., from duty without
and (2). notice.
Section 389. Failure to supply 200 ..
information by persons
in charge of burning or
burial grounds.
Section 390. Use of new burning 200 ..
or burial ground
without permission.
Section 391, Failure to comply 200 ..
sub-section (1). with requisition to close
a burning or burial
ground.
Section 391, Burning or burial of 200 ..
sub-section (2). corpses in a burning or
burial ground after it
has been closed.
17
(1) (2) (3) (4) (5)
(1) (2) (3) (4)
Section 392. Removal of corpses 100 ..
by other than prescribed
routes.
Section 393, Failure to give notice 100 ..
sub-section for removal of carcasses
(1), clause (b). of dead animals.
Section 398. Failure to comply 500 100
with requisition for
removal or abatement
of nuisance.
Section 399, Dogs not to be at 1,000 ..
sub-section (4). large in a street without
being secured by a
chain lead.
Section 399, Ferocious dogs at 1,000 ..
sub-section (5). large without being
muzzled, etc.
Section 402. Discharging 500 ..
fireworks, firearms, etc.,
likely to cause danger.
Section 403. Failure to comply 500 ..
with requisition to
render buildings, wells,
etc., safe.
Section 404. Failure to comply with 500 ..
requisition to enclose
land used for improper
purposes.
Section 406, Sale in municipal 200 ..
sub-section (1). markets without
permission.
Section 407, Use of places as 500 100
sub-sections (1) private markets without a
and (2).
licence and use of places
other than a municipal
slaughter house as
slaughter houses.
Section 407, Non-compliance with 200 ..
sub-section (2), conditions imposed by
proviso (a). Commissioner.
Section 411. Carrying on business 200 ..
or trade near a market.
18
(1) (2) (3) (4) (5)
(1) (2) (3) (4)
Section 415. Carrying on 200 50
butcher’s, fish-monger’s
or poulterer’s trade
without licence, etc.
Section 418, Keeping, 200 ..
sub-section (3). abandonment or
tethering of animals, etc.
Section 420. Hawking articles for 200 ..
sale without a licence,
etc.
Section 430, Failure to produce 100 50
sub-section (5). licence or written
permission.
Section 431. Preventing the 500 ..
Commissioner or any
person authorised in this
behalf from exercising
his powers of entry, etc.
Section 432. Preventing the 500 ..
Commissioner or any
person authorised in this
behalf from exercising
his power of entry upon
any adjoining land.
Section 437. Obstruction in 500 ..
execution of work.
Section 444, Failure to comply 200 ..
sub-section (4). with requisition to state
the name and address of
owners of premises.
Section 495. Obstruction of Mayor 500 ..
or any municipal
authority, etc.
Section 496. Removal of any mark 200 ..
set up for indicating level,
etc.
Section 497. Removal, etc., of 100 ..
notice exhibited by or
under orders of the
Corporation,
Commissioner, etc.
Section 498. Unlawful removal of 500 ..
earth, sand or other
material or deposit of any
matter or making of any
encroachment from any
land vested in the
Corporation.
19
(1) (2) (3) (4) (5)
8. 1961 52 The (A) For section 30, the following section shall be
Apprentices substituted, namely:––
Act, 1961
“30. Offences and penalties for contravention of
provisions of the Act or rules made thereunder.–– (1)
If any employer or any other person––
(a) contravenes the provisions of this Act and
rules relating to the number of apprentices which he
is required to engage; or
(b) required to furnish any information or
return––
(i) refuses or neglects to furnish such
information or return; or
(ii) furnishes or causes to be furnished any
information or return which is false and which he
either knows or believes to be false or does not
believe to be true; or
(iii) refuses to answer or gives a false answer
to any question necessary for obtaining any
information required to be furnished by him; or
(c) refuses or wilfully neglects to afford the
Central or the State Apprenticeship Adviser or such
other person, not below the rank of an Assistant
Apprenticeship Adviser, as may be authorised by
the Central or the State Apprenticeship Adviser in
writing in this behalf any reasonable facility for
making any entry, inspection, examination or
inquiry authorised by or under this Act; or
(d) requires an apprentice to work overtime
without the approval of the Apprenticeship
Adviser; or
(e) employs an apprentice on any work which is
not connected with his training; or
(f) makes payment to an apprentice on the basis
of piece-work; or
(g) requires an apprentice to take part in any
output bonus or incentive scheme; or
(h) engages as an apprentice a person who is not
qualified for being so engaged; or
(i) fails to carry out the terms and conditions of a
contract of apprenticeship,
shall be liable for the first contravention with advisory
and for every subsequent contravention with censure
or warning or a penalty under the provisions of this
Act, in the manner as may be prescribed, after giving
a reasonable opportunity of being heard.
(2) The provisions of this section shall not apply to
any establishment or industry which the Central
Government may, by order exempt with effect from
such date as may be mentioned therein.”.
20
(1) (2) (3) (4) (5)
(B) In section 31, for the words and figures “for which
no punishment is provided in section 30, he shall be
punishable with fine which shall not be less than one
thousand rupees but may extend to three thousand
rupees”, the words and figures “or of any rules made
thereunder for which no penalty is provided in section 30,
he shall be liable for the first contravention with advisory
and for every subsequent contravention with censure or
warning or a penalty under the provisions of this Act, in
the manner as may be prescribed, after giving a
reasonable opportunity of being heard” shall be
substituted.
(C) After section 31, the following section shall be
inserted, namely:––
“31A. Adjudication of penalties.––(1) The
appropriate Government may, by an order published in
the Official Gazette, appoint one or more Adjudicating
Authorities, not below the rank of an Assistant
Apprenticeship Adviser, as adjudicating officers for
adjudging penalties under the provisions of this Act in
such manner as may be prescribed.
(2) The appropriate Government shall while
appointing adjudicating officers, specify their
jurisdiction in the order under sub-section (1).
(3) The adjudicating officer may, by an order, issue
an advisory or censure or warning or impose the
penalty on any person or employer who contravenes
the provisions of sections 30 and 31 of this Act.
(4) The appropriate Government may, by an
order published in the Official Gazette, appoint
one or more Appellate Authorities, not below the rank
of Deputy Apprenticeship Adviser, under the
provisions of this Act in such manner as may be
prescribed.
(5) Any person aggrieved by an order made by the
adjudicating officer under sub-section (3) may prefer
an appeal to the appellate authority.
(6) Every appeal under sub-section (5) shall be filed
within such time, in such form and in such manner, as
may be prescribed.
(7) The appellate authority may, after giving the
parties to the appeal an opportunity of being heard,
pass such order as it may think fit, confirming,
modifying or setting aside the order appealed against.
(8) Where the person or employer does not pay the
penalty imposed by the adjudicating officer or the
appellate authority, within such time as may be
prescribed, the adjudicating officer or the appellate
authority may proceed for such action in such manner
as may be prescribed.
21
(1) (2) (3) (4) (5)
(9) All sums realised by way of penalties under
section 30 and section 31 shall be credited to the
Consolidated Fund of India.”.
(D) In section 37, sub-section (2) shall be omitted.
9. 1963 41 The Textiles (A) In section 17, in sub-section (2),––
Committee
(i) in the long line, for the words “conviction, be
Act, 1963
punishable”, the words “contravention, be” shall be
substituted;
(ii) for clauses (i) and (ii), the following clauses
shall be substituted, namely:—
“(i) warned at the first instance;
(ii) liable to a penalty which may extend to
twenty-five lakh rupees in case of continuing or
repeated contravention.”.
(B) After section 17, the following section shall be
inserted, namely:––
“17A. Adjudication of penalties.––(1) For the
purpose of adjudicating penalties under clauses (i) and
(ii) of sub-section (2) of section 17, the Central
Government shall appoint an adjudicating officer for
holding an enquiry and imposing penalties in such
manner as may be prescribed.
(2) Whosoever is aggrieved by an order of the
adjudicating officer under sub-section (1), may prefer
an appeal to the Appellate Authority who shall be
appointed by the Central Government, within a period
of sixty days from the date of receipt of such order in
such form and manner as may be prescribed.”.
(C) In section 18,—
(i) in sub-section (1), after the words “punished
accordingly”, the words, brackets and figures “as per
the provisions specified under clauses (i) and (ii) of
sub-section (2) of section 17” shall be inserted;
(ii) in sub-section (2), after the words “punished
accordingly”, the words, brackets and figures “as per
the provisions specified under clauses (i) and (ii) of
sub-section (2) of section 17” shall be inserted.
10. 1985 22 The (A) In section 10, for clause (a), the following clause
Handlooms shall be substituted, namely:––
(Reservation “(a) shall be punishable with imprisonment for a
of Articles term which may extend to three months or with a fine
for of not less than ten thousand rupees but may extend up
Production) to twenty-five thousand rupees per loom by which the
Act, 1985 said article or class of articles is produced, or with both
and in the case of a continuing or repeated
contravention, with an additional fine of one thousand
rupees per loom per day which may extend up to
five thousand rupees per loom per day during which
period such contravention continues or repeated after
conviction for the first such contravention;”.
22
(1) (2) (3) (4) (5)
(B) In section 11, for the words “punishable with
imprisonment for a term which may extend to three
months, or with fine which may extend to five thousand
rupees, or with both”, the words “punishable with fine of
not less than ten thousand rupees but may extend to
twenty-five thousand rupees” shall be substituted.
11. 1986 2 The (A) In section 19, in sub-section (3), for the words
Agricultural “punishable with imprisonment for a term which may
and extend to one year, or with fine, or with both”, the words
Processed “liable to a penalty of not less than ten thousand rupees
Food or not exceeding twice the value of goods, whichever is
higher, in respect of which such order has been made”
Products
shall be substituted.
Export
Development (B) For section 22, the following section shall be
Authority substituted, namely:––
Act, 1985
“22. Penalty for making false reports.—(1) Any
person who, being required by or under this Act to
furnish any return,––
(i) fails to furnish such return shall be warned for
the first contravention and for every subsequent
contravention, within a period of three years, be liable
for a penalty of not less than ten thousand rupees;
(ii) furnishes a return containing any particular
which is false and which he knows to be false or does
not believe to be true shall be warned or be liable for a
penalty of not less than ten thousand rupees, or with
both.”.
(C) Section 23 shall be omitted.
(D) In section 24, for the portion beginning with the
words and figures “sections 19, 22 and 23, shall be
punishable with” and ending with the words “for the first
such contravention”, the words and figures “sections 19
and 22 shall be warned for the first contravention and for
every subsequent contravention, within a period of three
years, be liable for a penalty of not less than ten thousand
rupees, or not exceeding an amount equivalent to the
value of goods, whichever is higher, in respect of which
such contravention has been made, and in case of a
continuing contravention as aforesaid, a penalty of not
less than fifty thousand rupees, or not exceeding an
amount equivalent to twice the value of goods, whichever
is higher, in respect of which contravention has been
made” shall be substituted.
(E) After section 25, the following section shall be
inserted, namely:––
“25A. Adjudication of penalties.—(1) For the
purposes of adjudging penalties under this Act, the
Chairman shall appoint the Secretary to the Authority
or any other officer authorised by the Central
Government, as the case may be, to be an adjudicating
officer for holding an inquiry and imposing penalty
under the provisions of this Act, in such manner as
may be prescribed, after giving the person concerned a
reasonable opportunity of being heard.
23
(1) (2) (3) (4) (5)
(2) Whoever is aggrieved by an order of the
adjudicating officer may prefer an appeal to the Chairman,
within a period of sixty days from the date of receipt of
such order in such form and manner as may be prescribed.
(3) An appeal may be admitted after the expiry of
the period of sixty days if the appellant satisfies the
Chairman that he had sufficient cause for not
preferring the appeal within that period.
(4) No appeal shall be disposed of unless the appellant
has been given a reasonable opportunity of being heard.
(5) The appellate authority referred to in
sub-section (2) shall dispose of the appeal within a
period of sixty days from the date of its filing.
(6) The amount of penalty imposed under
sub-section (1), if not paid, shall be recovered as an
arrears of land revenue.”.
(F) Section 26 shall be omitted.
(G) After section 26, the following section shall be
inserted, namely:––
“26A. Officers and employees of Authority to be
public servants.—All officers and other employees of
the Authority, when acting or purporting to act in
pursuance of any of the provisions of this Act, shall
be deemed to be public servants within the meaning
of clause (28) of section 2 of the Bharatiya Nyaya
Sanhita, 2023 (45 of 2023).”.
12. 1988 59 The Motor (A) In section 8, sub-section (8) shall be omitted.
Vehicles
(B) In section 9, sub-section (9) shall be omitted.
Act, 1988
(C) In section 12, sub-section (4) shall be omitted.
(D) In section 14, in sub-section (2), after clause (iv),
the following proviso shall be inserted, namely:––
“Provided that every driving licence shall,
notwithstanding its expiry under this sub-section,
continue to be effective for a period of thirty days
from the date of such expiry.”.
(E) In section 15,––
(i) in sub-section (1), for the word “expiry”, the
word “renewal” shall be substituted;
(ii) for the first proviso the following proviso shall
be substituted, namely:––
“Provided that in any case where the application
for the renewal of a licence is made within a period
of one year prior to date of its expiry, the driving
licence shall be renewed with effect from the date
of its expiry:”.
(F) In section 20, in sub-section (2),––
24
(1) (2) (3) (4) (5)
(i) the words, brackets, letter and figures
“clause (c) of sub-section (1) of section 132,” shall be
omitted;
(ii) the words, brackets, letter and figures
“clause (c) of sub-section (1) of section 132 or” shall
be omitted.
(G) In section 40, for the words “whose jurisdiction”,
the word “which” shall be substituted.
(H) In section 55, in sub-section (1), for the words
“fourteen days”, the words “thirty days” shall be
substituted.
(I) In section 65, in sub-section (2), in clause (k), the
words, brackets and figures “sub-section (13) of
section 41 or” shall be omitted.
(J) In section 75,––
(i) in the marginal heading, after the words “motor
cabs”, the words “and motor cycles” shall be inserted;
(ii) in sub-section (2), in clause (g), after the words
“motor cabs”, the words “and motor cycles” shall be
inserted.
(K) In section 84, in clause (f), for the words and
letters “Chapters X, XI and XII”, the words and letters
“Chapters XI and XII” shall be substituted.
(L) In section 96, in sub-section (2), clause (xii) shall
be omitted.
(M) In section 157, in sub-section (2), for the words
“fourteen days”, the words “thirty days” shall be
substituted.
(N) In section 163, after sub-section (2), the following
sub-section shall be inserted, namely:––
“(3) Notwithstanding anything contained in
sub-section (1), ex gratia payments awarded or
received in respect of the death of, or grievous hurt,
to any person, shall not be liable to be refunded to the
Motor Vehicles Accident Fund constituted under
section 164B.”.
(O) In section 164, after sub-section (3), the following
sub-section shall be inserted, namely:––
“(4) Notwithstanding anything contained in
sub-section (3), ex gratia payments received in
respect of death or grievous hurt due to an accident
arising out of the use of motor vehicle, shall not be
liable to be reduced from the amount of compensation
payable under this section.”.
(P) In section 166, after sub-section (3), the following
proviso shall be inserted, namely:—
“Provided that the Claims Tribunal may entertain
an application for compensation after the expiry of the
said period of six months from the date of occurrence
of the accident, but within a further period not
exceeding twelve months, if it is satisfied that the
applicant was prevented by sufficient cause from
making an application within such period.”.
25
(1) (2) (3) (4) (5)
(Q) In section 167, the words and letter “without
prejudice to the provisions of Chapter X” shall be
omitted.
(R) In section 168, after sub-section (3), the following
sub-section and proviso shall be inserted, namely:––
“(4) The application for compensation made under
section 166 shall be dealt with by the Claims Tribunal
as expeditiously as possible and endeavour shall be
made by it to dispose of the application within a
period of twelve months from the date of receipt of
the application:
Provided that where any such application could not
be disposed of within the said period of twelve
months, the Claims Tribunal shall record its reasons
in writing for not disposing of the application within
that period.”.
(S) For sections 177 and 177A, the following sections
shall be substituted, namely:––
“177. General provision for punishment of
offences.—Whoever contravenes any provision of
this Act or of any rule, regulation or notification made
thereunder shall, if no fine or penalty is provided for
the offence, for the first contravention be issued a
warning recorded in such manner as may be
prescribed by the Central Government, and for any
second or subsequent contravention with penalty
which shall not be less than five hundred rupees, but
may extend to one thousand and five hundred rupees.
177A. Penalty for contravention of regulations
under section 118.—Whoever contravenes the
regulations made under section 118 shall, for the first
contravention be issued a warning recorded in such
manner as may be prescribed by the Central
Government, and for any second or subsequent
contravention with penalty which shall not be less
than five hundred rupees, but may extend to one
thousand rupees.”.
(T) In section 178, for the words “punishable with
fine” wherever they occur, the words “liable for a
penalty” shall be substituted.
(U) In section 179,––
(i) in sub-section (1), for the words “punishable
with fine”, the words “liable for a penalty” shall be
substituted;
(ii) in sub-section (2), after the words “no other
penalty”, the words “or fine” shall be inserted.
26
(1) (2) (3) (4) (5)
(V) In section 182B,––
(i) in the marginal heading, for the word
“Punishment”, the word “Penalty” shall be
substituted;
(ii) for the words “punishable with fine”, the words
“liable for a penalty” shall be substituted.
(W) In section 186,––
(i) for the words “punishable for the first offence
with fine”, the words “liable for the first
contravention with penalty” shall be substituted;
(ii) for the words “subsequent offence with fine”,
the words “subsequent contravention with penalty”
shall be substituted.
(X) In section 190,––
(i) in sub-section (1), for the words “punishable
with fine”, the words “liable for a penalty” shall be
substituted;
(ii) for sub-section (2), the following sub-section
shall be substituted, namely:—
“(2) Any person who drives or causes or allows
to be driven, in any public place a motor vehicle,
which violates the standards prescribed,––
(i) in relation to road safety or control of
air-pollution, shall be liable for the first
contravention with penalty which may extend to
ten thousand rupees and he shall be disqualified
for holding licence for a period of three months
and for any second or subsequent offence with
imprisonment for a term which may extend to
six months, or with fine which may extend to
ten thousand rupees or with both; or
(ii) in relation to noise pollution, shall for the
first contravention be issued a warning recorded
in such manner as may be prescribed by the
Central Government, and for any second or
subsequent contravention with penalty which
may extend to ten thousand rupees.”.
(Y) In section 192, in sub-section (1), for the words
“punishable for the first offence with a fine which may
extend”, the words “liable for the first offence with a
penalty which may extend” shall be substituted.
(Z) In section 192B,––
(i) in sub-section (1), for the words “punishable
with fine”, the words “liable for a penalty” shall be
substituted;
27
(1) (2) (3) (4) (5)
(ii) in sub-section (2), for the words “punishable
with fine”, the words “liable for a penalty” shall be
substituted.
(ZA) In section 193,––
(i) in sub-section (1), for the words “for the first
offence with fine”, the words “for the first offence
with penalty” shall be substituted;
(ii) in sub-sections (2) and (3), for the words
“punishable with fine”, at both the places where they
occur, the words “liable for a penalty” shall be
substituted.
(ZB) In section 194,––
(i)for the words “punishable with a fine” wherever
they occur, the words “liable for a penalty” shall be
substituted;
(ii) in sub-section (1), for the words “additional
amount”, the words “additional penalty” shall be
substituted.
(ZC) In section 194A, for the words “punishable with
a fine”, the words “liable for a penalty” shall be
substituted.
(ZD) In section 194B, for the words “punishable with
a fine”, at both the places where they occur, the words
“liable for a penalty” shall be substituted.
(ZE) In section 194C, for the words “punishable with a
fine”, the words “liable for a penalty” shall be substituted.
(ZF) In section 194D, for the words “punishable with a
fine”, the words “liable for a penalty” shall be substituted.
(ZG) In section 194E, for the words “with
imprisonment for a term which may extend to six
months, or with a fine of ten thousand rupees or with
both”, the words “with a penalty of ten thousand rupees
and for any second or subsequent offence with
imprisonment for a term which may extend to six
months, or with fine which may extend to ten thousand
rupees or with both” shall be substituted.
(ZH) For section 194F, the following section shall be
substituted, namely:—
“194F. Use of horns and silence zones.—
Whoever—
(a)while driving a motor vehicle—
(i) sounds the horn needlessly or
continuously or more than necessary to ensure
safety; or
(ii) sounds the horn in an area with a traffic
sign prohibiting the use of a horn; or
28
(1) (2) (3) (4) (5)
(b) drives a motor vehicle which makes use of a
cut-out by which exhaust gases are released other
than through the silencer,
shall for the first contravention be issued a warning
recorded in such manner as may be prescribed by the
Central Government, and for any second or subsequent
contravention with a penalty which shall not be less
than one thousand rupees, but may extend to
two thousand rupees.”.
(Z-I) In section 199B,––
(i) in the marginal heading, after the words
“Revision of fines”, the words “and penalties” shall
be inserted;
(ii) for the words “The fines”, the words “The fines
and penalties” shall be substituted.
(ZJ) In section 200, in sub-section (1), for the portion
beginning with the words and figures “punishable under
section 177” and ending with the word and figures
“section 201”, the following shall be substituted, namely:—
“punishable under sub-section (2) of section 179,
section 180, section 181, section 182, sub-section (1)
or sub-section (3) or sub-section (4) of section 182A,
sub-section (1) of section 183, clause (c) of the
Explanation to section 184, section 189,
sub-section (2) of section 190, section 192,
section 192A, sub-section (3) of section 192B,
section 194E, section 196, section 198 and
section 201”.
(ZK) In section 210C, after clause (b), the following
clause shall be inserted, namely:––
“(ba) manner in which warning for contraventions
shall be recorded under this Chapter;”.
(ZL) In section 212, in sub-section (4), for the
words, brackets and figures “sub-section (1) of
section 163”, the words, brackets and figures
“sub-section (3) of section 161” shall be substituted.
13. 1994 44 The New (A) In section 2,—
Delhi
(i) after clause (1), the following clause shall be
Municipal
inserted, namely:––
Council Act,
1994 ‘(1A) “annual value” means the annual value of
any vacant land or covered space of any building
determined under section 64F;’;
(ii) after clause (25), the following clause shall be
inserted, namely:––
‘(25A) “Municipal Valuation Committee”
means the Municipal Valuation Committee
constituted under section 64A;’;
29
(1) (2) (3) (4) (5)
(iii) after clause (39), the following clause shall be
inserted, namely:––
‘(39A) “public utilities” include water-supply,
electric supply and lighting, sewerage and
drainage, solid waste management, energy and
telecommunication services, gas distribution
system and public transport system, whether
managed by Government or otherwise;’;
(iv) after clause (54), the following clause shall be
inserted, namely:––
‘(54A) “vacant land” means the land within a
premises excluding the occupied by the plinth of
any building erected thereon;’.
(B) For section 61, the following section shall be
substituted, namely:––
“61. Components of property tax.—Save as
otherwise provided in this Act, the property tax shall
be levied on lands and buildings in New Delhi and
shall consist of the following, namely:––
(a) a building tax; and
(b) a vacant land tax.”.
(C) After section 61, the following sections shall be
inserted, namely:––
‘61A. Building tax.—For any building, the
building tax shall be equal to the rate of building tax
as may be specified by the Council under section 61D
multiplied by the annual value of the covered space of
building determined under sub-section (1) of
section 64F or section 64G.
61B. Rebate for certain categories.—In the case of
any self-occupied residential building, singly owned
by such persons as may be specified by the bye-laws,
the Council may specify a rebate on the building tax
not exceeding thirty per cent. of the tax due on the
covered space of such building up to one hundred
square metres of the covered space:
Provided that such rebate shall not be available for
more than one residential building within the
jurisdiction of the New Delhi.
61C. Vacant land tax.—The vacant land tax in
respect of any premises shall be equal to the rate of
vacant land tax as may be specified by the Council
under section 61E multiplied by the annual value of
the vacant land determined under sub-section (3) of
section 64F:
30
(1) (2) (3) (4) (5)
Provided that where there is any construction on
the land and the area of plinth of such building is in
excess of such percentage of the area of the plot as
may be provided in the bye-laws, no vacant land tax
shall be levied.
61D. Rate of building tax.—Save as otherwise
provided in this Act, the base rate of property tax on
buildings in New Delhi shall be between a minimum
of ten per cent. and a maximum of thirty per cent. of
the annual values of such buildings as may be
specified by the Council from time to time:
Provided that the Council may, at any time, specify
fixed rates between the minimum and the maximum
rates of tax as aforesaid for different areas or for
different groups of buildings in such areas:
Provided further that the Council may also
introduce graduated rates of tax within the
minimum and the maximum rates of tax as
aforesaid on the basis of straight line system or
any other system as may be specified by the Council.
Explanation.—For the purpose of this section
and section 61E, “Straight line system” means the
system in which the rate of tax is equivalent to the
annual value of a property (X) divided by the
minimum annual value (X1) and Y being added to the
quotient so arrived, Y being the difference
between the maximum rate of tax and the quotient of
maximum (X2) and minimum (X1) annual values.
61E. Rate of vacant land tax.—Save as otherwise
provided in this Act, the rate of tax on vacant lands in
New Delhi shall be between a minimum of ten
per cent. and a maximum of thirty per cent. of the
annual value of such lands as may be specified by the
Council from time to time:
Provided that the Council may, at any time, specify
fixed rates between the minimum and the maximum
rates of tax as aforesaid for different areas or for
different groups of vacant lands in such area:
Provided further that the Council may also
introduce graduated rates of tax within the minimum
and the maximum rates of tax as aforesaid on the basis
of straight line system or any other system as may be
specified by the Council.’.
(D) In section 62, in sub-section (1), in clause (a), for
the Explanation, the following Explanation shall be
substituted, namely:––
‘Explanation.––“charitable purpose” includes
medical relief to, or education of, the poor, free of
charge;’.
31
(1) (2) (3) (4) (5)
(E) For section 63, the following section shall be
substituted, namely:––
“63. Unit of assessment.—(1) Every building and
every vacant land shall be assessed as a single unit:
Provided that where portions of any building or
vacant land are separately owned so as to be entirely
independent and capable of separate enjoyment,
notwithstanding the fact that the access to such
separate portions is made through a common passage
or a common stair case, as the case may be, such
separately owned portions may be assessed
separately.
(2) All buildings, to the extent they are contiguous
or are within the same cartilage or are on the same
foundation and are owned by the same owner or
co-owners as an undivided property, shall be treated
as one unit for the purpose of assessment under
this Act:
Provided that if any such building is sub-divided
into separate shares which are not entirely
independent and capable of separate enjoyment, the
Chairperson may, on application from the owners or
the co-owners, apportion the valuation and
assessment of such building among the co-owners
according to the value of their respective shares,
treating the entire building as a single unit.
(3) Each residential unit with its percentage of the
undivided interest in the common areas and facilities,
constructed or purchased and owned by, or under the
control of, any housing co-operative society
registered under any law regulating the co-operative
housing for the time being in force, shall be assessed
separately.
(4) Each apartment and its percentage of the
undivided interest in the common areas and facilities
in a building within the meaning of any law regulating
apartment ownership for the time being in force, shall
be assessed separately.
(5) If the ownership of any vacant land or building
or any portion thereof is sub-divided into separate
shares, or if more than one adjoining vacant land or
building or portion thereof comes under one
ownership by amalgamation, the Chairperson may,
on an application from the owner or the co-owners,
as the case may be, separate, or amalgamate, as
the case may be, such vacant land or building or
portion thereof so as to ensure conformity with the
provisions of this section.
32
(1) (2) (3) (4) (5)
(6) Notwithstanding any assessment made in
respect of any vacant lands or buildings before the
date of commencement of the Jan Vishwas
(Amendment of Provisions) Act, 2025, the
Chairperson may, on his own or otherwise,
amalgamate, or separate, or continue to assess,
such vacant lands or buildings or portions thereof
so as to ensure conformity with the provisions of this
section.
(7) The Chairperson shall, upon an application
made in this behalf by an owner, lessee, sub-lessee,
or occupier of any vacant land or building and upon
payment of such fee as may be provided in the
bye-laws, furnish to such owner, lessee, sub-lessee,
or occupier, as the case may be, information regarding
the apportionment of the property tax on such vacant
land or building among the several occupiers of
such vacant land or building for the current period
of assessment or for any preceding period of
assessment:
Provided that nothing in this sub-section shall
prevent the Council from recovering the arrear dues
on account of property tax from any such person,
jointly or severally.’’.
(F) After section 64, the following sections shall be
inserted, namely:––
‘64A. Constitution of Municipal Valuation
Committee.—(1) The Chairperson shall as soon as
may be after the commencement of the Jan Vishwas
(Amendment of Provisions) Act, 2025, and thereafter
at the expiration of every third year, constitute a
Municipal Committee by a public notice issued in
such form and manner as may be specified by
bye-laws.
(2) The Municipal Valuation Committee shall
consist of—
(a) the Chairperson;
(b) Principal Secretary or Secretary Finance, the
Government of National Capital Territory of
Delhi; and
(c) such other expert members, being not less
than two and not more than four, as the
Chairperson may determine.
(3) The qualifications and experience requisite for
their appointment, the manner of selection, and other
terms and conditions of service including salaries and
allowances, tenure of office shall be such as may be
determined by the Council.
33
(1) (2) (3) (4) (5)
(4) The salaries and allowances of the members of
the Municipal Valuation Committee shall be paid
from the Municipal Fund.
(5) The functions of the Municipal Valuation
Committee shall be—
(a) to make recommendations to the Council on
matters relating to classification of vacant lands and
buildings in any area of New Delhi into areas and
groups of lands and buildings and fixation of base
value per unit area of vacant land or per unit area of
covered space of building and factors for increase or
decrease, or for no increase or decrease, thereof;
(b) to consider objections under section 64D,
and to make recommendation thereon; and
(c) to perform such other functions as the
Council may require.
64B. Classification of vacant lands and buildings
into areas and groups and specification of base unit
area values therefor.—(1) The Municipal Valuation
Committee shall recommend the classification of the
vacant lands and buildings in any area of New Delhi
into areas and groups of lands and buildings after
taking into account all or any of the following
parameters, namely:––
(a) settlement pattern such as plotted housing,
group housing, colony with flats only, urban
village, unauthorised colony, resettlement colony,
rural village and non-residential areas;
(b) availability of civic and social infrastructure;
(c) access to roads;
(d) access to district centres, local shopping
centres, convenience shopping centres, and other
markets;
(e) land prices as may, from time to time, be
notified by the Government or the Delhi
Development Authority;
(f) use-wise category of any building including
residential building, business building, mercantile
building, building for recreation and sports
purposes, industrial building, hazardous building
and public purpose building including educational,
medical and such other institutional building and
farmhouse, as may be specified by the Council;
(g) in the case of buildings used for business,
mercantile, recreation and sports, industrial,
hazardous, storage or farmhouse purposes, the
location of such buildings adjacent to such
categories of streets, as may, subject to the
provisions of sub-section (2), be specified by the
Council;
34
(1) (2) (3) (4) (5)
(h) the types of buildings which may be
classified as pucca, semi-pucca or katcha, as may
be specified by the Council;
(i) the age-wise grouping of buildings as may be
specified by the Council; and
(j) such other parameters as may be considered
relevant by the Municipal Valuation Committee.
(2) The Municipal Valuation Committee shall
recommend, group-wise,––
(a) the base unit area value of any
owner-occupied vacant land, or any wholly
owner-occupied building of pucca structure,
constructed in the year 2025 or thereafter, and put
to exclusive residential use; and
(b) the factor for increasing or decreasing, or for
not increasing or decreasing, the base unit area
values specified in clause (a), separately in respect
of any or each of the parameters of type of area,
use, age, type of structure and occupancy status of
the vacant land or building, as the case may be,
subject to a lower limit of zero point five and an
upper limit of ten point zero.
64C. Notification of classification of vacant lands
and buildings into areas and groups and specification
of base unit area values thereof and factors for
increase or decrease.—(1) The Council shall, having
regard to the recommendations of the Municipal
Valuation Committee, declare its intention to classify
vacant lands and buildings in New Delhi area into
such areas and groups of lands and buildings as the
Council may, by public notice, specify, and shall also
specify in such public notice the base value it
proposes to specify per unit area of vacant land and
per unit area of covered space of building within each
such group and also the factors for increasing or
decreasing, or for not increasing or decreasing, the
base unit area values of vacant lands and buildings
referred to in clause (b) of sub-section (2) of
section 64B.
(2) The Council shall, on receipt of any
representation from any group in any area affected by
such classification of lands or buildings into any
group or specification of the base unit area values of
vacant lands or covered space of buildings within
such groups, and the factors for increasing or
decreasing, or for not increasing or decreasing, such
unit area values of vacant lands or covered space of
buildings, refer such representation to the Municipal
Valuation Committee for reconsideration, and the
decision of the Municipal Valuation Committee
thereon shall, subject to the provisions of section 64K,
be binding on the Council.
35
(1) (2) (3) (4) (5)
64D. Objection to the classification of vacant lands
and buildings into areas and groups and fixation of
base unit area values and factors for increasing or
decreasing such base unit area values.—(1) If any
owner or occupier of any vacant land or building in
any area in respect of which a public notice has been
issued under section 64C has any objection to the
manner of classification of any group or groups, or the
base value per unit area of vacant land or the base
value per unit area of covered space of building in any
group, or the factors as specified in clause (b) of
sub-section (2) of section 64B, he may submit to such
officer of the Council as may be authorised by the
Council in this behalf his objection in such form, and
containing such particulars, as may be prescribed,
within a period of thirty days from the date of
publication of such public notice, and such objection
shall be considered by the Municipal Valuation
Committee, after giving the person submitting the
objection an opportunity of being heard.
(2) The procedure for hearing and disposal of
objections shall be such, as may be prescribed.
(3) On the expiry of a period of thirty days from the
date of publication of the public notice under
section 64C and after considering the recommendation
of the Municipal Valuation Committee on the
objections, if any, in accordance with the provisions of
this section the Council shall, by public notice, specify
group-wise the base unit area value of vacant land and
the base unit area value of covered space of building
and the factors referred to in clause (b) of
sub-section (2) of section 64B:
Provided that the Council shall not alter the unit
area values recommended by the Municipal Valuation
Committee without the approval of the Government.
64E. Final base unit area values of vacant land and
of covered space of building.—(1) Subject to the
provisions of section 115, the base unit area value of
vacant land and the base unit area value of covered
space of building in any group, as may be specified
under sub-section (3) of section 64D, shall be final.
(2) The Council shall publish the final base unit
area value of vacant land and the final base unit area
value of covered space of building as aforesaid and
the factors used for increasing or decreasing, or for
not increasing or decreasing, the final base unit area
values as aforesaid and shall make them available for
inspection by any person free of charge and copies
thereof also made available to any person on payment
of cost as may be specified by the bye-laws.
64F. Determination of annual value of covered
space of building and of vacant land.—(1) The annual
value of any covered space of building in any area shall
36
(1) (2) (3) (4) (5)
be the amount arrived at by multiplying the total area
of such covered space of building by the final base
unit area value of such covered space and the relevant
factors as referred to in clause (b) of sub-section (2)
of section 64B.
Explanation.—For the purposes of this Act
“covered space”, in relation to a building, shall mean
the total floor area in all the floor thereof, including
the thickness of walls, and shall include the spaces of
covered verandah and courtyard, gangway, garage,
common service area, stilt parking area, staircase, and
balcony including any area projected beyond the plot
boundary and such other space, as may be prescribed.
(2) The Council may require the total area of the
covered space of building as aforesaid to be certified
by an architect registered under the Architects
Act, 1972 (20 of 1972), or any licensed architect,
subject to such conditions as may be specified by the
Council by a resolution in this behalf.
(3) The annual value of any vacant land in any area
shall be the amount arrived at by multiplying the total
area of such vacant land by the final base unit area
value of such land and the relevant factors as referred
to in clause (b) of sub-section (2) of section 64B.
(4) If, in the case of any vacant land or covered space
of building, any portion thereof is subject to different
final base unit area values or is not self-occupied, the
annual value of each such portion shall be computed
separately, and the sum of such annual values shall be
the annual value for such vacant land or covered space
of building, as the case may be.
64G. Determination of annual value of building
where land is exempted from property tax.—Where
any vacant land is exempted from property tax under
any law for the time being in force, the annual value of
any building erected on such land, which is in existence
for more than one year and is not entitled to any
exemption from such tax under this Act or any other
law for the time being in force, shall be determined in
accordance with the provisions of this Act.
64H. Transitory provisions.—(1) Notwithstanding
anything contained in this Act, as amended by the
Jan Vishwas (Amendment of Provisions) Act, 2025, a
tax on vacant land or covered space of building or both,
levied under this Act immediately before the
commencement of the Jan Vishwas (Amendment of
Provisions) Act, 2025, shall, on the commencement of
the Jan Vishwas (Amendment of Provisions)
Act, 2025, be deemed to be the tax on such vacant land
or covered space of building or both, levied under this
Act as amended by the Jan Vishwas (Amendment of
Provisions) Act, 2025, and shall continue to be in force
37
(1) (2) (3) (4) (5)
until such tax is revised in accordance with the
provisions of this Act, as amended by the Jan Vishwas
(Amendment of Provisions) Act, 2025.
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in
sub-section (1), where assessment has not been
finalised in respect of a vacant land or covered space
of a building or both, on the date of the
commencement of the Jan Vishwas (Amendment of
Provisions) Act, 2025, the assessee may have such
land or building or both, as the case may be, assessed
on the basis of the annual value.
(3) Notwithstanding anything contained in this Act
or any other law for the time being in force, or in any
judgment, any assessee, from whom tax dues are
pending at the time of the commencement of the
Jan Vishwas (Amendment of Provisions) Act, 2025
may seek assessment on the basis of annual value for
the period to which the due pertain to:
Provided that the benefit of any such scheme shall
only be applicable to those assessees who apply to be
so assessed within a period of six months of the
declaration of final classification of areas and base
unit area values of the property and the assessee
unconditionally withdraws the litigation, if any,
without any further recourse:
Provided further that the assessee shall have to pay
the dues as assessed under this Act as amended by the
Jan Vishwas (Amendment of Provisions) Act, 2025,
within a period of one year of the demand notice being
served on him.
64-I. Validity of base unit area values of vacant
land and covered space of building.—The base unit
area value of vacant land and the base unit area value
of covered space of building in respect of a specified
group in an area shall remain in force for a period of
three years:
Provided that till the revision of such base unit area
values is completed, the existing base unit area values
shall continue to be in force.
64J. Indexation of unit area value.—If, for any
reason, the base unit area value of any vacant land, or
the base unit area value of any covered space of
building, in any group in any area has not been revised
on the completion of a period of three years from the
date on which such base unit area values were last
determined, it shall be lawful for the Chairperson to
increase or decrease the base unit area values
according to the changes in the consumer price index
of urban non-manual workers or such other suitable
index as the Council may determine till such revision
is made by the Municipal Valuation Committee, and
to realise the amount of property tax for such covered
space of building or vacant land on the basis of the
revised base unit area values.
38
(1) (2) (3) (4) (5)
64K. Hardship and Anomaly Committee.—(1) The
Council shall, on the commencement of the
Jan Vishwas (Amendment of Provisions) Act, 2025,
appoint, for such period, not exceeding one year, as
the Council may think fit, a Hardship and Anomaly
Committee with a view to considering the cases of
hardships or anomalies, if any, in respect of property
tax imposed under the provisions of this Act as
amended by the Jan Vishwas (Amendment of
Provisions) Act, 2025.
(2) The constitution of the Hardship and Anomaly
Committee shall be such as may be specified by the
bye-laws.
(3) The Hardship and Anomaly Committee shall
make recommendations to the Council on the
petitions received from any group of affected persons
regarding any hardship or anomaly arising out of the
property tax imposed, and the decision of the Council
on such recommendation shall be final.
(4) The procedure for the functioning of the
Hardship and Anomaly Committee shall be such, as
may be specified by the Council.’.
(G) In section 65,—
(i) in sub-section (1), after the proviso, the
following proviso shall be inserted, namely:––
“Provided further that the Council may levy and
collect service charges from properties of the
Union of India at the rate of seventy-five per cent.
of property tax leviable, for rendering municipal
services.”;
(ii) after sub-section (2), the following sub-section
shall be inserted, namely:––
“(3) Property owned by a Government company
incorporated under the Companies Act, 2013
(18 of 2013), or a society formed under the
Societies Registration Act, 1860 (21 of 1860),
functioning under the administrative control of the
Central Government or any State Government, or
any Union territory or a statutory or autonomous
corporation constituted by an Act of Parliament or
by an Act of any State Legislature, which has a
corporate personality of its own, shall not be
deemed to be the property of the Union.”.
(H) For section 66, the following section shall be
substituted, namely:––
‘66. Incidence of property taxes.—(1) The property
tax on any land or building shall be primarily leviable
upon the owner thereof.
39
(1) (2) (3) (4) (5)
(2) The liability of the several owners of any land
or building constituting a single unit of assessment,
which is, or purports to be, severally owned in parts
including flats or rooms, for payment of property tax
or any instalment thereof, payable during the period
of such ownership, shall be joint and several:
Provided that the Chairperson may apportion the
amount of property tax on such land or building
among several co-owners:
Provided further that in any case where the
Chairperson is, for reasons to be recorded in writing,
satisfied that the owner is not traceable, the occupier
of such land or building for the time being shall be
liable for payment of the property tax and shall also
be entitled to the rebate, if admissible.
(3) In the case of any land or building which is not
self-occupied and where the owner is constrained by
any law, order of the Government or order of a court
from recovering the tax due, such tax shall be
recovered from the occupier or occupiers, as the case
may be:
Provided that the owner shall continue to pay such
amount of tax as he was liable to pay before the
date of coming into force of the Jan Vishwas
(Amendment of Provisions) Act, 2025 and only the
balance amount, if any, shall be recovered from the
occupier.
(4) The property tax on any land or building, which
is the property of the Council and the possession of
which has been delivered under any agreement or
licensing arrangement, shall be leviable upon the
transferee or the licensee, as the case may be.
(5) If any land has been let to a tenant or lessee for
a term exceeding one year and such tenant has built
upon such land, the property tax assessed in respect
of such land and the building erected thereon shall be
payable by such tenant or lessee, whether the land and
the building are in the occupation of such tenant or
lessee or a sub-tenant or sub-lessee of such tenant or
lessee, as the case may be.
Explanation.—For the purposes of this section,
“tenant” shall include any person deriving title to the
land or the building erected upon such land, from the
tenant, whether by operation of law or by transfer
inter vivos.’.
(I) Section 67 shall be omitted.
(J) In section 69, in the Explanation, after the words
“property tax and the penalty”, the words “and any other
sum recoverable as arrears of property tax” shall be
inserted.
40
(1) (2) (3) (4) (5)
(K) After section 69, the following sections shall be
inserted, namely:––
“69A. Submission of returns.—(1) The Chairperson
shall, with a view to determining the annual values of
vacant land and covered space of building in any area
and the person primarily liable for the payment of
property tax, by public notice, or by notice, in writing,
require the owner and the occupier of such vacant land
or covered space of building or any portion thereof,
including such owner or the person computing the tax
due under the provisions of section 69B, to furnish a
return in such form, as may be specified by the
bye-laws and within such time, not being less than
thirty days from the date of publication of such notice,
as may be specified therein, containing the following
particulars, namely:—
(a) the name of the owner and the occupier;
(b) the number of the area, the name of the area,
and the number and the sub-number of the
premises of such vacant land or covered space of
building, as the case may be;
(c) whether the building is pucca, semi-pucca or
katcha;
(d) year of completion of construction of the
building, or year or years of part construction
thereof, as the case may be;
(e) the use with reference to the provisions of
clause (f) of sub-section (1) of section 64B to
which such vacant land or covered space of
building is put or intended to be put;
(f) the area of the vacant land and the covered
space of the building with break-up of the area
under various uses;
(g) whether wholly owner-occupied or wholly
tenanted, or partly owner-occupied and partly
tenanted, and the areas thereof; and
(h) such other particulars as may be specified by
the bye-laws.
(2) Every owner and every occupier as aforesaid
shall be bound to comply with such notice and to
furnish a return with a declaration that the statement
made therein is correct to the best of knowledge and
belief of such owner and occupier.
(3) Whoever omits to comply with such
requisition, shall in addition to any penalty to which
he may be liable, be precluded from objecting to any
assessment made by the Chairperson in respect of
such land or building.
41
(1) (2) (3) (4) (5)
(4) The Chairperson or any person subordinate to
him and duly authorised by him in this behalf, in
writing, or any licensed architect, may, with or
without giving any previous notice to the owner or the
occupier of any land or building, enter upon, and
make any inspection or survey, and take measurement
of such land or building with a view to verifying the
statement made in the return for such land or building
or for collecting the particulars referred to in
sub-section (1) in respect of such land or building:
Provided that no such entry shall be made except
between the hours of sunrise and sunset.
69B. Self-assessment and submission of return.—(1)
After the date of commencement of the Jan Vishwas
(Amendment of Provisions) Act, 2025, any owner of
any vacant land or covered space of building or any
other person liable to pay the property tax or any
occupier in the absence of such owner or person, shall
file a return of self-assessment within such period as
may be specified by the bye-laws.
(2) Such owner or other person or occupier, as the
case may be, shall, thereafter, file the annual return
only in those cases where there is a change in the
position as compared to the previous return, within a
period of three months after the end of the financial
year in which the change in position has occurred.
(3) Any owner of any covered space of building or
vacant land or any other person liable to pay the
property tax, or any occupier in the absence of such
owner or person shall compute the tax due under
section 61A or section 61C, as the case may be, and
pay the same in equated quarterly instalment by the
30th day of June, 30th day of September, 31st day of
December and 31st day of March of the financial year
for which the tax is to be paid and in the event of
tax being paid in one lump sum for the said financial
year by the 30th day of June, rebate of such
percentage not exceeding fifteen per cent., as may be
notified by the Council, of the total tax amount due
shall be allowed.
(4) Any owner of any vacant land or covered space
of building or any other person liable to pay the
property tax or any occupier in the absence of such
owner or person, who computes such property tax
under this section, shall, on such computation pay the
property tax on such vacant land or covered space of
building, as the case may be, together with interest, if
any, payable under the provisions of this Act on—
(a) any new building or existing building which
has not been assessed; or
42
(1) (2) (3) (4) (5)
(b) any existing building which has been
redeveloped or substantially altered or improved
after the last assessment, but has not been
subjected to revision of assessment consequent
upon such redevelopment or alteration or
improvement, as the case may be.
(5) Such owner or person, as the case may be, shall
furnish to the Chairperson a return of self-assessment
in such form, and in such manner, as may be specified
in the bye-laws and every such return shall be
accompanied by proof of payment of property tax and
interest, if any.
(6) In the case of any new building for which an
occupancy certificate has been granted, or which has
been occupied, after the date of commencement of the
Jan Vishwas (Amendment of Provisions) Act, 2025,
such payment shall be made, and such return shall be
furnished, within a period of thirty days of the expiry
of the quarter in which such occupancy certificate is
granted or such building is occupied, whichever is
earlier.
Explanation.—For the removal of doubts, it is
hereby declared that the occupancy certificate may be
provisional or final and may be for the whole or any
part of the building and occupancy may be of the
whole or any part of the building.
(7) After the determination of the annual value of
vacant land or covered space of building under
section 64F or section 64G or revision thereof under
section 69C has been made, any amount paid on
self-assessment under this section shall be deemed to
have been paid on account of such determination
under this Act as amended by the Jan Vishwas
(Amendment of Provisions) Act, 2025.
(8) If any owner or other person as aforesaid, liable
to pay the property tax under this Act, fails to pay the
same together with interest thereon, if any, in
accordance with the provisions of this section, he shall,
without prejudice to any other action to which he may
be subject, be deemed to be a defaulter in respect of
such property tax, or interest, or both, remaining
unpaid, and all the provisions of this Act applicable to
such defaulter shall apply to him accordingly.
(9) If, after the assessment of the annual value of
any land or covered space, of building is finally made
under this Act, the payment on self-assessment under
this section is found to be less than that of the amount
payable by the assessee, the assessee shall pay the
difference within a period of two months from the
date of final assessment, failing which recovery shall
be made in accordance with the provisions of this Act,
but, after the final assessment, if it is found that the
assessee has paid excess amount, such excess amount
shall be adjusted:
43
(1) (2) (3) (4) (5)
Provided that in any case where the amount of tax
determined in the final assessment is more than the
amount of tax paid under self-assessment, and the
difference in the amount of tax is, in the opinion of
the Chairperson, the result of wilful suppression of
facts as defined in the bye-laws, the Chairperson may
levy a penalty not exceeding thirty per cent. of such
difference in the tax besides the interest thereon:
Provided further that the levy of such penalty shall
be in addition to any other punishment provided for
under this Act:
Provided also that the procedure for sending of
notice, hearing of objection and determination of tax
and penalties shall be such as may be specified in the
bye-laws.
(10) Where no notice is sent by the Chairperson
under section 69C within a period of twelve months
after the year to which such self-assessment relates,
such self-assessment shall be regarded as assessment
made under this Act:
Provided that in any case, where there has been
wilful suppression of facts, penalty up to thirty
per cent. of the tax due may be imposed:
Provided further that the procedure for sending of
notice, hearing of objection and determination of tax
and penalties shall be such as may be specified in the
bye-laws.
69C. Revision of assessment.—(1) The Chairperson
may cause any revision to be made at any time in the
annual value of any vacant land or covered space of
building or any portion thereof in the following cases,
namely:––
(i) where the nature of use changes; or
(ii) where the nature of occupancy changes; or
(iii) where a new building is erected or an
existing building is redeveloped or substantially
altered or improved during the period the annual
value remains in force; or
(iv) where, on an application made, in writing,
by the owner or the person liable to pay the
property tax, it is established that during the period
the annual value is in force, such value has been
reduced by reason of any substantial demolition or
has suffered depreciation on account of any
accident or any calamity proved to the satisfaction
of the Chairperson to have been beyond the control
of such owner or person; or
44
(1) (2) (3) (4) (5)
(v) where any vacant land or covered space of
building or portion thereof is acquired by purchase
or otherwise by the Central Government or the
Government or the Council; or
(vi) where any vacant land or covered space of
building or portion thereof is sold or otherwise
transferred to the Central Government or the
Government or the Council; or
(vii) where, upon the acquisition or transfer of a
part of any vacant land or covered space of
building, a residual portion remains; or
(viii) where it becomes necessary so to do for
any other reason to be recorded in writing.
(2) Before making any revision of the annual value
under sub-section (1), the Chairperson shall give any
owner, person or occupier as the case may be, affected
by such revision, notice of not less than thirty days
that he proposes to make the revision and consider
any objections which may be made by such owner,
person or occupier.
(3) Notwithstanding anything contained in
sub-section (1), where the annual value of any vacant
land or covered space of building—
(i) has not, for any reason, been determined
under this Act, the annual value of such vacant land
or covered space of building, as the case may be,
may be determined by the Chairperson at any time
during the currency of the period of assessment in
respect of such vacant land or covered space of
building under section 64F or section 64G, as the
case may be; or
(ii) has been cancelled on the ground of
irregularity, the annual value of such vacant land
or covered space of building, as the case may be,
may be determined by the Chairperson at any time
after such cancellation and such annual value of
such vacant land or covered space of building, as
the case may be, shall remain in force until a fresh
valuation or revision is made.
(4) Any revision of annual value of any vacant land
or covered space of building or any portion thereof
under this section shall be made with reference to the
group into which such vacant land or covered space
of building or part thereof is classified under
section 64B, and the annual value fixed per unit area
of such vacant land or covered space of building for
that group shall be applicable.
(5) Notwithstanding anything contained in the
foregoing provisions of this section, no revision of the
annual value of any vacant land or covered space of
building under this section shall be made without
giving the owner or the occupier of such vacant land
or covered space of building a reasonable opportunity
of being heard.
45
(1) (2) (3) (4) (5)
(6) Where any revision of annual value of any
vacant land or covered space of building is made
under this section, the order of such revision shall be
communicated to the owner or the occupier of such
vacant land or covered space of building within a
period of thirty days from the date of the order.
69D. Power of Chairperson regarding assessment.—
The Chairperson may, at any time—
(a) make, suo motu, an assessment in any case
where a return on the basis of self-assessment has
not been filed;
(b) revise any assessment where the information
furnished in the return of self-assessment is found
to be incorrect;
(c) reopen any assessment even after the period
of one year and not exceeding seven years in any
case where it has been detected that there is wilful
suppression of information or misclassification or
misrepresentation or collusion or fraud or forgery
in respect of assessment or any connection thereof;
(d) impose a penalty not exceeding thirty
per cent. of the difference in tax arising from
non-filing of a return in time, giving wrong
information or misclassification or
misrepresentation or collusion or fraud or forgery in
respect of assessment or any connection thereof; and
(e) suo motu examine or review any assessment
made under this Act for the purposes of satisfying
himself as to the legality or propriety of such
decision or order,
he may order or direct such assessing authority to
reassess the order or decision on such points as may
be specified by him in the order.”.
(L) For section 70, the following section shall be
substituted, namely:––
“70. Assessment list.—(1) The Council shall
maintain a Municipal Assessment Book, also known
as assessment list, in such form, and in such manner,
as may be specified in the bye-laws and shall make it
available for inspection, free of charge, through
electronic media or otherwise as may be specified by
the bye-laws:
Provided that the Municipal Assessment Book
shall not be kept pending for any case for which any
objection or appeal has been filed:
Provided further that subject to such alterations as
may be made thereafter in the assessment list under
this Act, the entries in the assessment list shall be
accepted as conclusive evidence for the purpose of
assessing any tax levied under this Act, of the annual
value of all lands and buildings to which such entries
respectively relate.
46
(1) (2) (3) (4) (5)
(2) The Chairperson may, at any time, amend the
Municipal Assessment Book for such reasons as may
be specified in the bye-laws:
Provided that no such amendment shall be made
without giving any person affected a reasonable
opportunity of being heard.”.
(M) Sections 71 and 72 shall be omitted.
(N) After section 72, the following section shall be
inserted, namely:––
“72A. Assignment of property identification
code.—(1) The Council shall cause to be maintained
a register wherein the property identification code
numbers by which any premises or part thereof shall
be known, shall be recorded in respect of each such
premises in the municipal area and such numbers
shall be fixed in such manner as may be specified in
the bye-laws.
(2) When the property identification code numbers
in respect of premises in any area of the Council have
been determined, the Chairperson shall notify the same
in such manner as may be specified in the bye-laws.
(3) After the property identification code numbers
in respect of premises in any area have been notified
under sub-section (2), any person required under this
Act or any other law to make any application to the
Council for permission, licence or for payment of any
tax or for payment of any dues for any service and for
such other purposes as may be prescribed, shall at the
time of making such application, mention in the
application, the property identification code number
determined under sub-section (1).”.
(O) Section 73 shall be omitted.
(P) Sections 77, 78, 79 and 80 shall be omitted.
(Q) Section 88 shall be omitted.
(R) For section 98, the following sections shall be
substituted, namely:—
“98. Time and manner of payment of taxes.—(1)
Save as otherwise provided in this Act, any tax levied
under this Act shall be payable on such dates, in such
number of instalments and in such manner as may be
determined by the bye-laws made in this behalf:
Provided that if, on the commencement of the
Jan Vishwas (Amendment of Provisions) Act, 2025,
there is any increase in the amount of property tax
which was being paid or was payable immediately
before such commencement of the Jan Vishwas
(Amendment of Provisions) Act, 2025, the difference
in the amount of property tax in excess of fifty
per cent. above the tax being paid or being payable,
shall be given effect to by stages covering a period of
47
(1) (2) (3) (4) (5)
three years by dividing the amount of such increase in
the property tax by three, the quotient being added to
the amount of property tax which was payable
immediately before the date of commencement of the
Jan Vishwas (Amendment of Provisions) Act, 2025,
and to the amount of property tax which shall be
payable respectively in each of the remaining two
successive years after such addition.
(2) Where any person liable for the payment of
property tax under this Act has failed to pay––
(a) such tax by the date as specified in
sub-section (3) of section 69B; or
(b) the arrear of tax, interest and penalty, if any,
and any other sum in the nature of tax up to the
31st March of the preceding financial year,
he shall be liable to pay simple interest at the rate of
one and a half per cent. for every month or part of the
month comprising the period from the expiry of the
due date, till the amount is actually paid.
98A. Punishment for wilful default in payment of
property tax, furnishing wrong information in return
of assessment, etc.—Whoever wilfully makes default
in the payment of, or wilfully attempts in any manner
whatsoever to evade, any tax, including amount of
interest due and penalty levied under this Act, or
furnishes any wrong information in the return of
assessment, or wilfully fails to furnish in due time the
return of property tax, or does not furnish information
as asked for under any provision of this Act, he shall,
without prejudice to any other penal provision under
this Act to which he may be subject, be punishable,—
(a) in the case where the amount of tax sought
to be evaded exceeds ten lakh rupees, with rigorous
imprisonment for a term which shall not be less
than three months but which may extend up to
seven years, and with fine of not less than fifty
per cent. of the amount of tax evaded; and
(b) in any other case, with rigorous
imprisonment for a term which shall not be less
than one month but which may extend up to three
years, and with fine of not less than fifty per cent.
of the amount of tax evaded:
Provided that the penalties so imposed shall be in
addition to, and not in derogation of, any liability in
respect of the payment of tax which the defaulter may
have incurred.”.
(S) In section 99, in sub-section (1), in the proviso,
clause (c) shall be omitted.
(T) In section 101, in sub-section (2),—
(i) for the word “twenty”, the word “thirty” shall
be substituted;
48
(1) (2) (3) (4) (5)
(ii) for the words, brackets and figures “the amount
of the tax and the notice fee, payable under
sub-section (2) of section 100”, the words “the
amount of tax, notice fee and any interest that the
defaulter may be liable to pay” shall be substituted.
(U) After section 102, the following section shall be
inserted, namely:—
“102A. Recovery of property tax.—If, after the
date of commencement of the Jan Vishwas
(Amendment of Provisions) Act, 2025, any owner of
any vacant land or covered space of building or any
other person liable to pay the property tax or any
occupier, in the absence of any such owner or person,
does not file a return of self-assessment within a
period of sixty days of the commencement of the
Jan Vishwas (Amendment of Provisions) Act, 2025,
or if the person liable for the payment of property tax
does not pay the amount due within the due date, such
sum together with all costs and penalty may be
recovered under a warrant, issued in the form set forth
in the Seventh Schedule, by distress and sale of the
movable property, or the attachment and sealing and
sale of the immovable property, of the defaulter:
Provided that the Chairperson shall not recover any
sum the liability for which has been remitted on
appeal under the provisions of this Act.”.
(V) Sections 110 to 114 shall be omitted.
(W) Section 125 shall be omitted.
(X) Section 214 shall be omitted.
(Y) Section 234 shall be omitted.
(Z) In section 242, sub-section (4) shall be omitted.
(ZA) In section 254, in sub-section (1), clause (i) shall
be omitted.
(ZB) After section 254, the following section shall be
inserted, namely:––
“254A. Appeals against the penalties.––(1) Any
person on whom penalty has been imposed other than
a penalty imposed under the proviso to sub-section (9)
of section 69B and clause (d) of section 69D under any
of the provisions of this Act or any bye-laws or rules
made thereunder may file an appeal to the appellate
authority who shall be an officer designated by the
Chairperson and who shall be not less than one rank
above the officer who has imposed the said penalty.
49
(1) (2) (3) (4) (5)
(2) Every appeal under sub-section (1) shall be
filed within a period of thirty days from the date of
receipt of notice of the penalty, in such form and
manner as may be specified by the bye-laws made by
the Council.
(3) The appellate authority may, after giving the
appellant an opportunity of being heard, pass such
summary order confirming, modifying or setting
aside the penalty.
(4) The appellate authority shall dispose of the
appeal within a period of sixty days from the date of
its filing.
(5) In the event of non-payment of penalty amount
upheld by the appellate authority within a period of
fifteen days of receipt of the order of the appellate
authority, the noticee shall be liable to be punished
with a fine which may extend to twice the penalty
imposed.”.
(ZC) In section 265, sub-section (3) shall be omitted.
(ZD) Section 272 shall be omitted.
(ZE) Section 299 shall be omitted.
(ZF) For section 304, the following section shall be
substituted, namely:––
“304. Disposal of dead animals.—Whenever any
animal in the charge of any person dies, the person in
charge thereof shall within a period of twenty-four
hours convey the carcass to a place provided or
appointed under section 263 for the final disposal of
the carcasses of dead animals.”.
(ZG) Section 307 shall be omitted.
(ZH) Sections 311 and 312 shall be omitted.
(Z-I) Sections 320 and 321 shall be omitted.
(ZJ) Section 324 shall be omitted.
(ZK) In section 346,––
(i) in the marginal heading, the words “or
molestation” shall be omitted;
(ii) the words “or molest” shall be omitted.
(ZL) In section 353, after sub-section (1), the
following sub-section shall be inserted, namely:––
50
(1) (2) (3) (4) (5)
“(1A). The service of notices, summons and other
documents referred to in sub-section (1) may be made by
delivering or transmitting a copy thereof by registered
post acknowledgment due, addressed to the defendant or
his agent empowered to accept the service or by speed
post or by such courier services as are approved by the
High Court or by any other means of transmission of
documents (including fax message or electronic mail
service) as may be provided by rules made by the High
Court.”.
(ZM) In section 363, for the words “rates and rent”,
the words “rates, rents or penalty imposed under this
Act” shall be substituted.
(ZN) For section 369, the following section shall be
substituted, namely:––
“369. Punishment for certain offences.—(1)
Whoever—
(a) contravenes any provision of any of the
sections, sub-sections, clauses, provisos or other
provisions of this Act mentioned in column (1) of
the Table in the Tenth Schedule; or
(b) fails to comply with any order or direction
lawfully given to him or any requisition lawfully
made upon him under any of the said sections,
sub-sections, clauses, provisos or other provisions,
shall be punishable––
(i) with a fixed penalty, if provided in a said
column, specified in that behalf in column (3) of
the said Table including daily penalty specified
in column (4) in case of a continuing
contravention for every day during which such
contravention or failure continues after
imposition of first penalty; or
(ii) with a fine, if any is provided for the
contravention, which may extend to amount
mentioned in column (5) or, if any imprisonment
is provided for the contravention, with
imprisonment for a term which may extend to the
period specified in that behalf in column (5) of the
said Table or, in case both fine and imprisonment
is provided, with both; and
(iii) in the case of a continuing contravention or
failure, with an additional fine which may extend
to the amount specified in column (6) of that Table
for every day during which such contravention or
failure continues after conviction for the first such
contravention or failure.
51
(1) (2) (3) (4) (5)
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in any
other law for the time being in force, for the purposes
of this Chapter and the Tenth Schedule, and for any
bye-laws or rules made or amended under this Act as
amended by the Jan Vishwas (Amendment of
Provisions) Act, 2025, the word penalty, unless the
context otherwise requires, shall mean a cost of civil
nature imposed by the Chairperson or any other
officer so empowered in this behalf by the
Chairperson, for commission or non-commission of
an act prohibited or prescribed by this Act and it shall
not be considered a conviction, and the imposition of
a fixed penalty shall not be considered criminal
proceedings.
(3) Where there is no fine or imprisonment
prescribed against a contravention in the Tenth
Schedule, the same shall be treated as a civil offence,
and no criminal proceedings under this act shall be
initiated in the first instance against the said
contravention:
Provided that nothing contained herein shall
preclude or adversely affect the right of the
Chairperson or such other officer as he may authorise,
to initiate a criminal proceeding against the offender
under any other law for the time being in force in case
the penalty is not paid on time by the offender.
(4) Every penalty imposed shall be paid within a
period of thirty days of the notice issued by the
Chairperson, or such other officer as may be
authorised by him in this behalf and whoever fails to
pay the penalty within the time prescribed or does not
file an appeal against such penalty, shall, in addition
to any other liability under any law for the time being
in force, also be liable to be punished with a fine may
extend up to twice of the penalty imposed.
(5) Notwithstanding anything contained in
sub-section (1), whoever contravenes the provisions
of sub-section (1) of section 221, or sub-section (1) of
section 224, or sub-section (1) of section 225 or
sub-section (1) of section 229, or sub-section (1) of
section 244, in relation to any street which is a public
street, shall be punishable with simple imprisonment
which may extend to six months or with fine which
may extend to five thousand rupees or with both.
(6) Any member, referred to in clauses (b) and (d)
of sub-section (1) of section 4, who knowingly
acquires, directly or indirectly, any share or interest in
any contract made with, or any work done for the
Council, shall be deemed to have committed the
offence made punishable under section 202 of the
Bharatiya Nyaya Sanhita, 2023 (45 of 2023).”.
52
(1) (2) (3) (4) (5)
(Z-O) For section 370, the following sections shall be
substituted, namely:––
“370. General penalty.—Whoever, in any case in
which a penalty or fine is not expressly provided by
this Act, fails to comply with any notice, order or
requisition issued under any provision thereof, or
otherwise contravenes any of the provisions of this
Act, shall in the first instance be liable to pay a penalty
of five hundred rupees and in case of continuing
contravention shall also be liable to pay a penalty of
fifty rupees per day, in case of failure to pay the
penalty within a period of thirty days shall also be
liable to be punished with fine which may extend to
five hundred rupees, and a fine of fifty rupees per day
in the case of a continuing failure or contravention for
every day after the first contravention during which
he has persisted in the failure or contravention.
370A. Provision for remedial action or warning
notice.––Notwithstanding anything contained in this
Act or any rules made or bye-laws framed thereunder,
a remedial action or warning notice to the offender in
the first instance of violation may be issued before
imposition of penalty for the offences as mentioned in
the Eleventh Schedule:
Provided that in such cases, on commission of the
same offence by the same offender, or in case of failure
to comply with the directions contained in the remedial
action or warning notice within the stipulated time,
penalty as prescribed in the Tenth Schedule shall be
imposed without further notice:
Provided further that the Central Government may, by
notification, amend, modify, add the offences for which
a remedial action or warning notice to the offender in the
first instance may be issued before imposition of
penalty.”.
(ZP) In section 372,—
(i) in the opening portion, for the words and figures
“The Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973 (2 of 1974)”,
the words and figures “The Bharatiya Nagarik
Suraksha Sanhita, 2023 (46 of 2023)” shall be
substituted;
53
(1) (2) (3) (4) (5)
(ii) in item (1), for the words and figures
“section 42 of that Code”, the words and figures
“section 39 of that Sanhita” shall be substituted.
(ZQ) For section 382, the following section shall be
substituted, namely:––
“382. Duties of police officer.––It shall be the duty
of all police officers, to assist the Chairperson,
municipal officers and other municipal employees, or
any other officer authorised by the Chairperson, in
discharge of their duties and functions under this Act
or any rule, regulation or bye-law made thereunder
and to assist them in the exercise of their lawful
authority for prevention of commission of any
contravention under this Act or otherwise.”.
(ZR) For section 390, the following section shall be
substituted, namely:––
“390. Penalty or find for breaches of
bye-laws.—(1) Any bye-law made under this Act
may provide that a contravention thereof shall be
liable—
(a) to a penalty or a fine which may extend to
five hundred rupees, or both;
(b) to a penalty or a fine which may extend to
five hundred rupees, or both and in the case of a
continuing contravention, with an additional
penalty or fine which may extend to fifty rupees,
or both for every day during which such
contravention continues after adjudication for the
first such contravention; and
(c) to a penalty or a fine which may extend to
fifty rupees for every day during which the
contravention continues, or both, after the receipt
of a notice from the Chairperson or any municipal
officer duly authorised in that behalf, by the person
contravening the bye-law requiring such person to
discontinue such contravention.
(2) Any such bye-law may also provide that a
person contravening the same shall be required to
remedy so far as lies in his power, the mischief, if any,
caused by such contravention.”.
(ZS) For the Tenth Schedule, the following
Schedules shall be substituted, namely:––
54
(1) (2) (3) (4) (5)
‘THE TENTH SCHEDULE
[See section 369(1)]
PENALTIES AND FINES
Explanation.––The entries in column (2) of the following Table below under the
heading “subject” are not intended as definitions of the offences prescribed in the
provisions mentioned in column (1) of the Table or even as abstracts of those
provisions, but are inserted merely as reference to subject thereof:—
TABLE
Section, Subject Penalty Fine (in Rupees)/
sub-section, (in Rupees) imprisonment
clause or
Penalty Daily Fine Daily
proviso
Penalty Fine
(1) (2) (3) (4) (5) (6)
Section 74, Failure to give 50 - - -
sub-sections notice of transfer or
(1)and (2). devolution of land or
building.
Section 74, Failure to produce - - -
200
sub-section (3). instrument of transfer.
Section 75. Failure to give 100 - - -
notice of erection of
new building, etc.
Section 76. Failure to give 100 - - -
notice of demolition or
removal of building.
Section 81, Wilful delay or 100 - - -
sub-section (2). obstruction of valuers.
Section 89. Prohibition of - - 200 5
advertisement without
permission.
Section 119, Non-compliance 200 - - -
sub-section (2). with the requisition of
attendance before the
Chairperson.
Section 122. Failure to disclose 100 - - -
liability.
Section 148. Use for non- 500 50 - -
domestic purposes of
water supplied for
domestic purposes.
Section 152, Non-compliance 200 20 - -
sub-section (1). with the requisition to
take water supply.
Section 153. Prohibition to 200 20 - -
occupy new premises
without arrangement
for water supply.
55
(1) (2) (3) (4) (5)
(1) (2) (3) (4) (5) (6)
Section 164. Waste or misuse of 500 - - -
water.
Section 165. Refusal of - - 100 -
admittance, etc.
Section 168, Laying of water - - 100 10
sub-section (1). pipes, etc., in a
position where pipes
may be injured or
water therein polluted.
Section 168, Construction of - - 100 -
sub-section (2). latrines, etc., in a
position where pipes
may be injured or
water therein polluted.
Section 173. Injury to, or - - 50 -
interference with free
flow of contents of
municipal drain of
drains communicating
with municipal drain.
Section 174, Private drain not to - - 50 -
sub-section (2). be connected with
municipal drain
without notice.
Section 175. Non-compliance - - 100 25
with requisition for
drainage of undrained
premises.
Section 176. Erection of new - - 1000 -
premises without drain.
Section 177. Non-compliance - - 50 5
with requisition of
maintenance of drainage
works for any group or
block of premises.
Section 178. Non-compliance - - 50 5
with directions to close
or limit the use of
private drains in
certain cases.
Section 179. Non-compliance - - 50 -
with Chairperson’s
orders regarding the
use of a drain by a
person other than the
owner thereof.
Section 180. Non-compliance - - 50 -
with requisition for
keeping sewage and
rain water drains
distinct.
56
(1) (2) (3) (4) (5)
(1) (2) (3) (4) (5) (6)
Section 181. Non-compliance with - - 50 -
requisition for the
pavement of courtyard,
etc.
Section 183. Connection with - - 200 50
municipal water works
or drains without
written permission.
Section 186, Non-compliance with - - 50 5
sub-section (4). requisition to close,
remove or divert a pipe
or drain.
Section 193, Execution of work 200 - - -
sub-section (1). by a person other than
a licensed plumber.
Section 193, Failure to furnish 100 - - -
sub-section (2). when required, name
of licensed plumber
employed.
Section 193, Licensed plumbers 100 - - -
sub-section (6). not to demand more
than the charges
prescribed.
Section 193, Licensed plumbers 100 - - -
sub-section (8). not to contravene
bye-laws or execute
work carelessly or
negligently, etc.
Section 194. Prohibition of - - 100 -
wilful or neglectful
acts relating to water
or sewage works.
Section 209, Construction of 1000 100 - -
sub-section (3). building within the
regular line of street
without permission.
Section 211. Failure to comply 200 50 - -
with requisition to set
back buildings to
regular line of street.
Section 217, Utilising, selling or - - Rigorous -
sub-section (5). otherwise dealing with imprisonment
any land or laying out a which may
private street otherwise extend to
than in conformity with three years.
orders of the Council.
Section 218, Failure to comply 200 50 - -
sub-section with requisition to
(1), clauses show cause for
(a)and (b). alteration of street or
for a appearance before
the Chairperson.
57
(1) (2) (3) (4) (5)
(1) (2) (3) (4) (5) (6)
Section 219, Failure to comply 100 50 - -
sub-section (1). with requisition on
owner of private street
or owner of adjoining
land or building to
level, etc., such street.
Section 221, Prohibition of - - 200 -
sub-section (1). projections upon
streets, etc.
Section 221, Failure to comply - - 200 -
sub-section (2). with requisition to
remove projections
from streets.
Section 222, Failure to comply 200 - - -
sub-section (2). with requisition to
remove a verandah,
balcony, etc., put up in
accordance with
section 221(1).
Section 223. Failure to comply 50 - - -
with requisition to have
ground floor doors,
etc., so altered as not to
open outwards.
Section 224, Erection, etc., of - - 200 10
sub-section (1). structures of fixtures
which cause
obstruction in streets.
Section 225. Deposit, etc., of - - 100 -
things in streets.
Section 227, Tethering of 1000 50 - -
sub-sections animals and milking of
(1)and (2). cattle in public streets.
Section 228, Unlawful removal of 100 - - -
sub-section (4). bar or shorting timber,
etc., or removal or
extinction of light.
Section 229, Streets not to be - - 200 10
sub-section (1). opened or broken and
building materials not
to be deposited thereon
without permission.
Section 231, Name of street and 1000 - - -
sub-section (2). number of house not to
be destroyed or
defaced, etc.
Section 232, Failure to comply 200 50 - -
sub-section (1). with requisition to
repair, protect or
enclose a dangerous
place.
58
(1) (2) (3) (4) (5)
(1) (2) (3) (4) (5) (6)
Section 237, Erection of a - - Simple -
sub-section (1). building without the imprisonment
sanction of the which may
Chairperson. extend to six
months or
with fine
which may
extend to
Rs. 5000 or
with both.
Section 237, Use of inflammable 1000 - - -
sub-section (2). materials without
permission.
Section 238, Failure to give - - Simple -
sub-section (1). notice of intention to imprisonment
erect a building. which may
extend to six
months or
with fine
which may
extend to
Rs. 5000 or
with both.
Section 239, Failure to give - - Simple -
sub-section (1). notice of intention to imprisonment
make additions, etc., to which may
extend to six
building.
months or
with fine
which may
extend to
Rs. 5000 or
with both.
Section 244. Failure to comply - - 100 5
with requisition to
round off buildings at
corners of streets.
Section 245, Erection of buildings 1000 - - -
sub-section (1). on new streets without
leveling.
Section 245, Erection of 1000 - - -
sub-section (2). buildings or execution
of work within regular
line of street or in
contravention of any
scheme or plan.
Section 247. Failure to demolish - - Simple -
buildings erected imprisonment
without sanction or which may
extend to six
erection of buildings in
months or
contravention of order.
with fine
which may
extend to
Rs. 5000 or
with both.
59
(1) (2) (3) (4) (5)
(1) (2) (3) (4) (5) (6)
Section 248. Erection of buildings - - Simple -
in contravention of imprisonment
conditions of sanction, which may
etc. extend to six
months or
with fine
which may
extend to
Rs. 5000 or
with both.
Section 249. Failure to carry out - - Simple -
alterations. imprisonment
which may
extend to six
months or
with fine
which may
extend to
Rs. 5000 or
with both.
Section 251, Non-compliance 1000 100 - -
sub-sections with provision as to
(1) and (2). completion certificates,
occupation or use, etc.,
without permission.
Section 252. Non-compliance - - Simple -
with restrictions on imprisonment
user of buildings. which may
extend to six
months or
with fine
which may
extend to
Rs. 5000 or
with both.
Section 258, Failure to comply 500 50 - -
sub-sections with requisition to
(1) and (2). remove structures
which are in ruins or
likely to fall.
Section 259, Failure to comply 1000 - - -
sub-section (1). with requisition to
vacate buildings in
dangerous conditions,
etc.
Section 264. Failure to provide 500 - - -
for collection, removal
and deposit of refuse
and provision of
receptacles.
Section 265, Failure to collect 500 - - -
sub-section (1). and remove filth and
polluted matter.
60
(1) (2) (3) (4) (5)
(1) (2) (3) (4) (5) (6)
Section 266. Failure to comply 500 - - -
with requisition for
removal of rubbish, etc.,
from premises used as
market, etc.
Section 267, Keeping rubbish 100 25 - -
sub-section (1). and filth for more than
twenty-four hours, etc.
Section 267, Allowing filth to 200 - - -
sub-section (2). flow in streets.
Section 267, Depositing rubbish 200 - - -
sub-section (3). or filth, etc., in street, etc.
Section 271, Latrines and urinals 200 - - -
sub-section (1). not to be constructed
without permission or
in contravention of
terms prescribed.
Section 273. Failure to provide 500 100 - -
latrines for premises
used by large number
of people and to keep
them clean and in
proper order.
Section 274. Failure to comply 500 100 - -
with requisition to
provide latrines for
market, cattle shed,
cart stand, etc., and to
keep them clean and in
proper order.
Section 275, Failure to comply 500 50 - -
clauses (a), (b), with requisition to
(c)and (d). enforce provision of
latrine or urinal
accommodation, etc.
Section 276, Failure to comply - - 1000 -
sub-section (2). with requisition for
removal of congested
buildings.
Section 277. Failure to comply - - 1000 -
with requisition to
improve buildings unfit
for human habitation.
Section 279, Failure to comply - - 1000 -
sub-sections with order of
(1), (2), (3) and demolition of
(4). buildings unfit for
human habitation.
Section 280. Failure to comply 500 50 - -
with requisition of the
Chairperson to remove
insanitary huts and
sheds, etc.
61
(1) (2) (3) (4) (5)
(1) (2) (3) (4) (5) (6)
Section 281, Prohibition against 100 - - -
sub-section (1). washing by washerman.
Section 282. Failure to give 100 - - -
information of
dangerous disease.
Section 284. Failure to comply 200 - - -
with requisition to
cleanse and disinfect
buildings or articles.
Section 285. Failure to comply 200 - - -
with requisition to
destroy infectious huts
or sheds.
Section 286. Washing of clothing, 50 - - -
bedding, etc., at any
place not notified by the
Chairperson.
Section 288, Sending infected 50 - - -
sub-section (1). clothes to washerman or
laundry.
Section 288, Failure to furnish 50 - - -
sub-section (2). address of washerman
or laundry to which
clothes have been sent.
Section 289, Use of public 100 - - -
sub-sections conveyances by persons
(1), (2) and (3). suffering from a
dangerous disease, etc.
Section 291. Failure to disinfect 100 - - -
buildings before letting
the same.
Section 292. Disposal of infected 100 - - -
articles without
disinfection.
Section 293. Making or selling of 100 - - -
food, etc., or washing
of clothes by infected
persons.
Section 294. Sale of food or drink 100 - - -
contravention restriction
prohibition Chairperson.
Section 295. Removal or use of 100 - - -
water from wells and
tanks in contravention
of prohibition of
Chairperson.
Section 296. Exposure of persons 200 - - -
to risk of infection by
the presence or conduct
of a person suffering
from a dangerous
disease, etc.
62
(1) (2) (3) (4) (5)
(1) (2) (3) (4) (5) (6)
Section 297. Removal of 200 - - -
infectious corpses in
contravention of the
provisions.
Section 298, Absence of 500 - - -
sub-sections sweepers, etc., from
(1)and (2). duty without notice.
Section 300. Failure to supply 200 - - -
information by persons
incharge of burning or
burial grounds.
Section 301. Use of new burning 200 - - -
or burial ground
without permission.
Section 302, Failure to comply 200 - - -
sub-section (1). with requisition to
close a burning or
burial ground.
Section 302, Burning or burial of 200 - - -
sub-section (2). corpses in a burning or
burial ground after it
has been closed.
Section 303. Removal of corpses 100 - - -
by other than
prescribed routes.
Section 304, Failure to give notice 100 - - -
clause (b). for removal of carcasses
of dead animals.
Section 308, Commission of - - 50 -
sub-sections nuisances.
(1), (2) and (3).
Section 309. Failure to comply 500 100 - -
with requisition for
removal or abatement
of nuisance.
Section 310, Dogs not to be at 1000 - - -
sub-section (4). large in a street
without being secured
by a chain lead.
Section 310, Ferocious dogs at 1000 - - -
sub-section (5). large without being
muzzled, etc.
Section 313. Discharging fireworks, 500 - - -
firearms, etc., likely to
cause danger.
Section 314. Failure to comply 500 - - -
with requisition to
render buildings,
wells, etc., safe.
63
(1) (2) (3) (4) (5)
(1) (2) (3) (4) (5) (6)
Section 315. Failure to comply 500 - - -
with requisition to
enclose land used for
improper purposes.
Section 317, Sale in municipal 200 - - -
sub-section (1). markets without
permission.
Section 318, Use of places as 500 100 - -
sub-sections private markets without
(1)and (2). a licence and use of
places other than a
municipal slaughter
house as slaughter
houses.
Section 318, Non-compliance with 200 - - -
sub-section (2), conditions imposed by
proviso (a). Chairperson.
Section 322. Carrying on business 200 - - -
or trade near a market.
Section 325. Carrying on 200 50 - -
butcher’s, fishmonger’s
or Poulterer’s trade
without licence, etc.
Section 326. Establishment of - - 5000 50
factory, etc., without
permission.
Section 327. Certain things not to - - 1000 100
be kept and certain
trades and operations
not to be carried on
without a licence.
Section 328, Keeping, abandonment 200 - - -
sub-section (3). or tethering of animals,
etc.
Section 329, Use of premises in - - 500 -
sub-section (5). contravention of
declaration.
Section 330. Hawking articles 200 - - -
for sale without a
licence, etc.
Section 331. Keeping a lodging - - 100 -
house, eating house,
tea shop, etc., without
licence or contrary to
licence.
Section 332. Keeping open - - 500 50
theatre, circus or other
place of public
amusement without
licence or contrary to
terms of licence.
64
(1) (2) (3) (4) (5)
(1) (2) (3) (4) (5) (6)
Section 339, Failure to produce 100 50 - -
sub-section (5). licence or written
permission.
Section 340. Preventing the 500 - - -
Chairperson or any
person authorised in
this behalf from
exercising his powers
of entry, etc.
Section 341. Preventing the 500 - - -
Chairperson or any
person authorised in
this behalf from
exercising his power
of entry upon any
adjoining land.
Section 346. Obstruction in 500 - - -
execution of work.
Section 353, Failure to comply 200 - - -
sub-section (4). with requisition to
state the name and
address of owner of
premises.
Section 364, Failure of occupier - - 200 50
sub-section (3). of land or building to
afford owner facilities
for complying with
provisions of the Act,
etc., after eight days
from issue of order by
district judge.
Section 404. Obstruction of 500 - - -
Chairperson or a
member, etc.
Section 405. Removal of any 200 - - -
mark set up for
indicating level, etc.
Section 406. Removal, etc., of 100 - - -
notice exhibited by or
under orders of the
Council, Chairperson,
etc.
Section 407. Unlawful removal 500 - - -
of earth, sand or other
material or deposit of
any matter or making
of any encroachment
from any land vested
in the Council.
65
(1) (2) (3) (4) (5)
THE ELEVENTH SCHEDULE
(See section 370A)
Table
Section, Subject
sub-section,
clause or
proviso
Use for non-domestic purposes of
148
water supplied for domestic purposes
Prohibition to occupy new premises
153
without arrangement for water supply
227(1) and Tethering of animals and milking of
(2) cattle in public streets
Failure to provide for collection,
264 removal and deposit of refuse and
provision of receptacles
Failure to collect and remove filth and
265(1)
polluted matter
Keeping rubbish and filth for more
267(1)
than twenty-four hours, etc.
267(2) Allowing filth to flow in streets
Depositing rubbish or filth, etc., in
267(3)
street, etc.
Prohibition against washing by
281(1)
washerman
Washing of clothing, bedding, etc., at
286 any place not notified by the
Commissioner
Dogs not to be at large in a street
310(4)
without being secured by a chain lead
Ferocious dogs at large without being
310(5)
muzzled, etc.
Sale in municipal markets without
317(1)
permission
Keeping, abandonment or tethering of
328(3)
animals, etc.
Hawking articles for sale without a
330
licence, etc.
Failure to produce licence or written
339(5)
permission
298 (1) and Absence of sweepers, etc., from duty
(2) without notice.'.
66
(1) (2) (3) (4) (5)
14. 2003 36 The (A) In section 146,––
Electricity
(i) for the words “imprisonment for a term which
Act, 2003
may extend to three months or with fine which may
extend to one lakh rupees, or with both”, the words
“fine which shall not be less than ten thousand rupees
but which may extend to ten lakh rupees” shall be
substituted;
(ii) for the words “which may extend to five
thousand rupees”, the words “which shall not be less
than one thousand rupees but which may extend to
fifty thousand rupees” shall be substituted.
(B) In section 152, in sub-section (1), for the word
“may”, the word “shall” shall be substituted.
15. 2006 27 The Micro, For section 27, the following section shall be
Small and substituted, namely:––
Medium
“27. Penalty for failure to comply with certain
Enterprises
provisions of this Act.––(1) Whoever wilfully
Development
furnishes false information while registering under
Act, 2006
section 8 or fails to comply with the provisions of
sub-section (2) of section 26 shall be––
(a) warned at the first instance of non-
compliance;
(b) liable to a penalty which may extend to fifty
thousand rupees in case of second or subsequent
instances of non-compliance.
(2) Where a buyer contravenes the provisions of
section 22, he shall be punishable with fine which
shall not be less than ten thousand rupees.
(3) The penalties under sub-section (1) may be
imposed by the Development Commissioner to the
Government of India.
(4) Any person aggrieved by the penalties imposed
under sub-section (1) may, within a period of three
months from the date of the order, prefer an appeal to
the Secretary to the Government of India in charge of
the Ministry or Department of the Central
Government having administrative control of the
micro, small and medium enterprises.”.
16. 2010 1 The Legal (A) In section 2, after clause (e), the following clause
Metrology shall be inserted, namely:––
Act, 2009
“(ea) “improvement notice” means an
improvement notice issued under this Act;”.
(B) In section 25, for the words “shall be punished with
fine which may extend to one lakh rupees and for the
second offence with fine which may extend to two lakh
rupees and for the third and subsequent offence, with fine
which may extend to five lakh rupees”, the words “shall be
warned with an improvement notice and for the second
offence shall be punished with a fine which may extend to
one lakh rupees and for the subsequent offences the fine
shall be double the amount paid for previous offence,
subject to a maximum of five lakh rupees” shall be
substituted.
67
(1) (2) (3) (4) (5)
(C) In section 26, for the words “second or subsequent
offence”, the words “second offence with fine which
may extend to one lakh rupees and for the third or
subsequent offence” shall be substituted.
(D) In section 27, for the words “shall be punished
with a fine which may extend to one lakh rupees and for
the second offence with fine which may extend to two
lakh rupees and for the third and subsequent offence,
with fine which may extend to four lakh rupees”, the
words “shall be warned with an improvement notice and
for the second offence shall be punished with a fine
which may extend to one lakh rupees and for subsequent
offences the fine shall be double the amount paid for
previous offence, subject to a maximum of four lakh
rupees” shall be substituted.
(E) In section 28, for the words “shall be punished
with fine which may extend to fifty thousand rupees and
for the second offence with fine which may extend to one
lakh rupees and for the third and subsequent offence with
fine which may extend to two lakh rupees”, the words
“shall be warned with an improvement notice and for the
second offence shall be punished with a fine which may
extend to fifty thousand rupees and for subsequent
offences the fine shall be double the amount paid for
previous offence, subject to a maximum of two lakh
rupees” shall be substituted.
(F) In section 29, for the words “shall be punished
with fine which may extend to fifty thousand rupees, for
the second offence with fine which may extend to one
lakh rupees and for the third and subsequent offence with
a fine which may extend to two lakh rupees”, the words
“shall be warned with an improvement notice, for the
second offence shall be punished with a fine which may
extend to fifty thousand rupees and for subsequent
offences the fine shall be double the amount paid for
previous offence, subject to a maximum of two lakh
rupees” shall be substituted.
(G) In section 30, for the words “second and
subsequent offence”, the words “second offence with
fine which may extend to twenty thousand rupees and for
the third or subsequent offence” shall be substituted.
(H) In section 31, for the words “shall be punished with
fine which may extend to twenty-five thousand rupees and
for the second offence with fine which may extend to fifty
thousand rupees and for the third and subsequent offence,
with fine which may extend to one lakh rupees”, the words
“shall be warned with an improvement notice, for the
second offence shall be punished with a fine which may
extend to twenty-five thousand rupees and for subsequent
offences the fine shall be double the amount paid for
previous offence, subject to a maximum of one lakh
rupees” shall be substituted.
68
(1) (2) (3) (4) (5)
(I) In section 32, for the words “shall be punished with
fine which may extend to twenty thousand rupees and for
the second or subsequent offence with imprisonment for a
term which may extend to one year and also with fine”, the
words “shall be warned with an improvement notice, for
the second offence shall be punished with a fine which
may extend to twenty thousand rupees and for a
subsequent offence the fine shall be double the amount
paid for previous offence, subject to a maximum of five
lakh rupees” shall be substituted.
(J) In section 33, for the words “shall be punished with
fine which shall not be less than two thousand rupees but
which may extend to ten thousand rupees and, for the
second or subsequent offence, with imprisonment for a
term which may extend to one year and also with fine”, the
words “shall be punished with a fine which may extend to
ten thousand rupees and for a subsequent offence the fine
shall be double the amount paid for previous offence,
subject to a maximum of five lakh rupees” shall be
substituted.
(K) In section 34, for the words “shall be punished with
fine which may extend to twenty-five thousand rupees and
for the second offence with fine which may extend to
fifty thousand rupees and for the third and subsequent
offence, with fine which may extend to one lakh rupees”, the
words “shall be warned with an improvement notice, for the
second offence shall be punished with a fine which may
extend to twenty-five thousand rupees and for subsequent
offences the fine shall be double the amount paid for previous
offence, subject to a maximum of one lakh rupees” shall be
substituted.
(L) In section 35, for the words “shall be punished with
fine which may extend to twenty-five thousand rupees and
for the second offence with fine which may extend to fifty
thousand rupees and for the third and subsequent offence,
with fine which may extend to one lakh rupees”, the words
“shall be warned with an improvement notice, for the
second offence shall be punished with a fine which may
extend to twenty-five thousand rupees and for subsequent
offences the fine shall be double the amount paid for
previous offence, subject to a maximum of one lakh
rupees” shall be substituted.
(M) In section 36,––
(i) in sub-section (1), for the words “shall be
punished with fine which may extend to twenty-five
thousand rupees, for the second offence, with fine
which may extend to fifty thousand rupees and for the
subsequent offence, with fine which shall not be less
than fifty thousand rupees but which may extend to one
lakh rupees or with imprisonment for a term which may
extend to one year or with both”, the words “shall be
warned with an improvement notice, for the second
offence shall be punished with a fine which may extend
to twenty-five thousand rupees and for a third or
subsequent offence the fine shall be double the amount
paid for previous offence, subject to a maximum of five
lakh rupees” shall be substituted;
69
(1) (2) (3) (4) (5)
(ii) in sub-section (2), for the words “second and
subsequent offence”, the words “second offence with
fine which may extend to one lakh rupees and for the
third or subsequent offence” shall be substituted.
(N) In section 37, in sub-section (2), for the words
“he shall, for every such contravention, be
punishable with imprisonment for a term which
may extend to one year or with fine which may
extend to ten thousand rupees or with both”, the words
“shall be punished with a fine which may extend to
twenty thousand rupees and for a subsequent offence the
fine shall be double the amount paid for previous
offence, subject to a maximum of five lakh rupees” shall
be substituted.
(O) In section 38, for the words “shall be punished
with fine which may extend to twenty-five thousand
rupees and for the second or subsequent offence, with
imprisonment for a term which may extend to six
months, or with fine, or with both”, the words “shall be
warned with an improvement notice, for the second
offence shall be punished with a fine which may extend
to twenty-five thousand rupees and for a subsequent
offence the fine shall be double the amount paid for
previous offence, subject to a maximum of five lakh
rupees” shall be substituted.
(P) In section 39, for the words “shall be punished
with fine, which may extend to fifty thousand rupees and
for the second or subsequent offence, with imprisonment
for a term which may extend to one year and also with
fine”, the words “shall be warned with an improvement
notice, for the second offence shall be punished with a
fine which may extend to fifty thousand rupees and for a
subsequent offence the fine shall be double the amount
paid for previous offence, subject to a maximum of five
lakh rupees” shall be substituted.
(Q) Section 40 shall be omitted.
(R) In section 41,––
(i) in sub-section (1), for the words “shall
be punished with fine which may extend to five
thousand rupees and for the second or subsequent
offence with imprisonment for a term which may
extend to six months and also with fine”, the
words “shall be warned with an improvement
notice, for the second offence shall be punished
with a fine which may extend to five thousand rupees
and for a subsequent offence the fine shall be
double the amount paid for previous offence, subject
to a maximum of five lakh rupees” shall be
substituted;
70
(1) (2) (3) (4) (5)
(ii) in sub-section (2), for the words “shall be
punished with fine which may extend to five thousand
rupees and for the second or subsequent offence, with
imprisonment for a term which may extend to one
year and also with fine”, the words “shall be warned
with an improvement notice, for the second offence
shall be punished with a fine which may extend to five
thousand rupees and for a subsequent offence the fine
shall be double the amount paid for previous offence,
subject to a maximum of five lakh rupees” shall be
substituted.
(S) In section 45, for the words “shall be punished
with fine which may extend to twenty thousand rupees
and for the second or subsequent offence, with
imprisonment for a term which may extend to one year,
or with fine, or with both”, the words “shall be warned
with an improvement notice, for the second offence shall
be punished with a fine which may extend to twenty
thousand rupees and for a subsequent offence the fine
shall be double the amount paid for previous offence,
subject to a maximum of five lakh rupees” shall be
substituted.
(T) In section 46, for the words “shall be punished
with fine which may extend to five thousand rupees and
for the second or subsequent offence, with imprisonment
for a term which may extend to one year, or with fine, or
with both”, the words “shall be warned with an
improvement notice, for the second offence shall be
punished with a fine which may extend to five thousand
rupees and for a subsequent offence the fine shall be
double the amount paid for previous offence, subject to
a maximum of five lakh rupees” shall be substituted.
(U) In section 47, for the words “shall be punished
with fine which may extend to twenty thousand rupees,
or with imprisonment for a term which may extend to
one year or with both”, the words “shall be warned with
an improvement notice, for the second offence shall be
punished with a fine which may extend to twenty
thousand rupees and for a subsequent offence the fine
shall be double the amount paid for previous offence,
subject to a maximum of five lakh rupees” shall be
substituted.
(V) In section 48, after sub-section (4), before the
Explanation, the following proviso shall be inserted,
namely:––
“Provided that the person who commits the second
or subsequent offences, compounds the offence
before the institution of the prosecution, on payment
for credit to the Government of such sum as may be
prescribed.”.
(W) In section 50, in sub-section (1), in clause (c),
after the words “the Central Government”, the words “or
any officer specially authorised in this behalf by that
Government” shall be inserted.
71
(1) (2) (3) (4) (5)
(X) In section 52, in sub-section (3), for the words
“five thousand rupees”, the words “five lakh rupees”
shall be substituted.
(Y) In section 53, in sub-section (3), for the words
“five thousand rupees”, the words “one lakh rupees”
shall be substituted.
17. 2023 18 The Jan After section 3, the following proviso shall be
Vishwas inserted, namely:––
(Amendment
“Provided that notwithstanding anything contained
of Provisions)
in this section, if any enactment mentioned in the
Act, 2023
Schedule provides the manner of revision of fines and
penalties therein, only the said provision shall be
applicable for increase of fines and penalties for
provisions of such enactment.”.
72
STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
The corner stone of democratic governance lies in the Government trusting
its own people and institutions. A web of outdated rules and regulations causes trust
deficit. It has been the endeavour of the Government to achieve the principle of
‘Minimum Government Maximum Governance’, redefining the regulatory
landscape of the country under the Ease of Living and Ease of Doing Business
reforms.
2. Reducing compliance burden gives impetus to business process
reengineering and improves ease of living of people. Series of measures such as
simplifying, digitising and rationalising compliances are being undertaken to
achieve these goals. India needs to shed the baggage of antiquated laws that
adversely affect developmental trajectory. With the advent of technology and
changes in the socio-economic scenario, it is essential to unshackle the bygone
mindset in this Amritkaal of independent India.
3. The Government is committed to make India the most preferred global
investment destination by boosting investor confidence. The fear of imprisonment
for minor offences is a major factor hampering the growth of the business ecosystem
and individual confidence. Decriminalisation of large number of minor offences by
replacing them with monetary penalties have been identified. The endeavour is not
only to make lives and businesses easier but also to reduce judicial burden.
Settlement of large number of issues, by compounding method, adjudication and
administrative mechanism, without involving courts, will enable persons to remedy
minor contraventions and defaults, sometimes committed unknowingly by them,
and save time, energy and resources.
4. The Jan Vishwas (Amendments of Provisions) Bill, 2025 is a continuation
of the regulatory reforms started under the Jan Vishwas (Amendment of Provisions)
Act, 2023. This initiative aims to decriminalise minor offences across various laws
to reduce the compliance burden on businesses, promote ease of doing business and
ease of living for citizens by rationalising processes by issuing warnings at the first
instance of contraventions and imposing penalties for subsequent contraventions.
The amendments proposed under this Bill cover a wide range of laws affecting
different sectors including agricultural and industrial regulations. The goal of
Jan Vishwas is to create a more business-friendly environment and promote ease of
living by eliminating unnecessary legal hurdles and simplifying regulatory
landscape. The initiative underscores India’s commitment to creating a predictable,
transparent and fair regulatory environment.
5. Through the Jan Vishwas (Amendment of Provisions) Bill, 2025, apart
from decriminalisation, 20 additional provisions of the Motor Vehicle Act, 1988
(59 of 1988) and 47 provisions of the New Delhi Municipal Council Act, 1994
(44 of 1994) are proposed to be amended to facilitate Ease of Living which will
serve as a significant step in saving time and cost of all concerned.
6. The Bill seeks to achieve the above objectives.
NEW DELHI; PIYUSH GOYAL.
The 12th August, 2025.
72
73
FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM
The Bill, if enacted, would not involve any expenditure, either recurring or
non-recurring, from and out of the consolidated Fund of India.
73
74
MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION
In the Bill, in the Schedule,––
1.In serial number 8,––
(a)clause (A) empowers the appropriate Government to make rules
for the manner in which advisory, censure, warning, or penalty is to be
imposed, the quantum or range of such penalty, and the procedure for
affording a reasonable opportunity of being heard;
(b)clause (B) empowers the appropriate Government to make rules
to provide for the manner in which advisory, censure, warning, or
penalty is to be imposed for contraventions not specifically covered
under section 30 of the Act;
(c) clause (C), inter alia, empowers the appropriate Government
to make rules to provide for––
(i) the procedure for adjudication, the powers of adjudicating
officers, and the hearing and inquiry process;
(ii)the structure and rank of appellate authorities, as well as
the process for adjudication of appeals;
(iii)the time limits for filing an appeal, the form and manner
of its submission;
(iv)the action to be taken by the Adjudicating Officer or the
Appellate Authority in case the person or employer does not pay
the imposed penalty.
2.In serial number 11, sub-clause (2) of clause (E) empowers the Central
Government to make rules regarding form and manner of preferring appeal
against the order of adjudicating officer before the Chairman.
3. In serial number 13, clause (K) empowers the Council, inter alia, to
make the bye-laws for providing––
(i)the constitution of the Hardship and Anomaly Committee;
(ii) the form and manner of furnishing of returns; the time within
which such form shall be filed for computing of tax; the time within
which the return of self-assessment shall be filed under section 69B;
(iii) the procedure for sending of notice, hearing of objection and
determination of tax and penalties;
(iv)the form and manner of maintenance of Municipal Assessment
Book and the procedure for inspection of said Book;
(v) the manner of maintenance of property identification code by
the Council;
(vi)the time and manner of payment of taxes;
(vii)the form and manner of filing of appeal under sub-section (2)
of section 254A;
74
75
(viii) the form and manner of appeal in respect of receipt of notice
of the penalty under sub-section (2) of section 254A.
4. The matters in respect of which rules may be made in accordance
with the provisions of the Bill are generally matters of procedures and
administrative detail and it is not practicable to provide for them in the Bill.
The delegation of legislative power is, therefore, of a normal character.
76
ANNEXURE
EXTRACTS FROM THE RESERVE BANK OF INDIA ACT, 1934
(2 OF 1934)
* * * * *
Penalties. 58B. (1) * * * * *
(2) If any person fails to produce any book, account or other document or to
furnish any statement, information or particulars which, under this Act or any order,
regulation or direction made or given thereunder, it is his duty to produce or furnish
or to answer any question put to him in pursuance of the provisions of this Act or of
any order, regulation or direction made or given thereunder, he shall be punishable
with fine which may extend to one lakh rupees in respect of each offence and if he
persists in such failure or refusal, with further fine which may extend to five
thousand rupees for every day, after the first during which the offence continues.
* * * * *
(4AA) If any auditor fails to comply with any direction given or order made
by the Bank under section 45MA, he shall be punishable with fine which may extend
to ten lakh rupees.
* * * * *
Power of Bank 58G. (1) * * * * *
to impose fine.
(2) For the purpose of imposing penalty under sub-section (1), the Bank shall
serve a notice on the non-banking financial company requiring it to show cause why
the amount specified in the notice should not be imposed as a penalty and a
reasonable opportunity of being heard shall also be given to such non-banking
financial company.
* * * * *
————
EXTRACT FROM THE DRUGS AND COSMETICS ACT, 1940
(23 OF 1940)
* * * * *
Penalty for 33-I. (1) * * * * *
manufacture,
(2) Contravenes any other provisions of this Chapter or of section 24 as
sale, etc., of
Ayurvedic, applied by section 33H or any rule made under this Chapter, shall be punishable
Siddha or with imprisonment for a term which may extend to six months and with fine which
Unani drug in
shall not be less than ten thousand rupees.
contravention
of this Chapter. * * * * *
————
EXTRACT FROM THE CENTRAL SILK BOARD ACT, 1948
(61 OF 1948)
* * * * *
Penalties. 14. (1) If any person—
* * * * *
(b) obstructs any officer of the Board Committee and Registration Committee
in the exercise of any power, conferred, or the discharge of any duty imposed on
him by or under this Act, or
he shall be punishable with imprisonment for a term which may extend to one year,
or with fine which may extend to one thousand rupees, or with both.
* * * * *
————
76
77
EXTRACT FROM THE ROAD TRANSPORT CORPORATIONS ACT, 1950
(64 OF 1950)
* * * * *
46. The State Government may, by rule, provide that the breach of any rules Penalty for
made by it under section 44 or any regulations made by a Corporation under breach of rules.
section 45 shall be punishable with fine which may extend to five hundred rupees,
and when the breach is a continuing one, with a further fine not exceeding twenty
rupees for every day after the date of the first conviction during which the offender
is proved to have persisted in the offence.
* * * * *
————
EXTRACTS FROM THE TEA ACT, 1953
(29 OF 1953)
* * * * *
37. Any person who being required by or under this Act to furnish any return Penalty for
fails to furnish such return or furnishes a return containing any particular which is making false
return.
false and which he knows to be false or does not believe to be true shall be
punishable with fine which may extend to one thousand rupees.
* * * * *
42A. (1) For the purposes of adjudging the penalties under sub-section (1) of Adjudication of
section 41 and section 42, the Deputy Chairman of the Board shall appoint the penalties.
Secretary to the Board or any other officer authorised by the Central Government,
as the case may be, to be an adjudicating officer for holding an inquiry and imposing
penalty in the manner as may be prescribed, after giving a reasonable opportunity
of being heard.
* * * * *
————
EXTRACT FROM THE COIR INDUSTRY ACT, 1953
(45 OF 1953)
* * * * *
CHAPTER VI
MISCELLANEOUS
20. (1) If any person contravenes the provisions of section 12, he shall be
Penalties.
punishable with fine which may extend to five hundred rupees.
(2) Any person who attempts to contravene or abets the contravention of the
provisions of section 12 shall be deemed to have contravened those provisions.
21. (1) If the person committing an offence under section 12 is a company, Offences by
every person who at the time the contravention was committed was incharge of, and companies.
was responsible to, the company for the conduct of the business of the company, as
well as the company shall be deemed to be guilty of the contravention and shall be
liable to be proceeded against and punished accordingly:
Provided that nothing contained in this sub-section shall render any such
person liable to any punishment, if he proves that the offence was committed
without his knowledge or that he exercised all due diligence to prevent the
commission of such offence.
78
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (1) where an offence
under section 12 has been committed by a company and it is proved that the offence
has been committed with the consent or connivance of, or is attributable to any
neglect on the part of, any director, manager, secretary or other officer of the
company, such director, manager, secretary or other officer shall also be deemed to
be guilty of that offence and shall be liable to be proceeded against and punished
accordingly.
Explanation.—For the purposes of this section—
(a) “company” means any body corporate and includes a firm or other
association of individuals; and
(b) “director” in relation to a firm means a partner in the firm.
* * * * *
————
EXTRACTS FROM THE DELHI MUNICIPAL CORPORATION ACT, 1957
(66 OF 1957)
* * * * *
Power of 123D. The Commissioner may, at any time—
Commissioner
regarding (a) make, suo motu, an assessment in any case where a return on the
assessment. basis of self assessment has not been filed;
(b) revise any assessment where the information furnished in the return
of self assessment is found to be incorrect;
(c) reopen any assessment even after the period of one year in any case
where it has been detected that there is wilful suppression of information; and
(d) impose a penalty not exceeding thirty per cent. of the difference in
tax arising from non-filing of a return in time, giving wrong information or
wilful suppression of facts.
* * * * *
Presentation of 153. (1) When any tax has become due, the Commissioner shall cause to be
bill. presented to the person liable for the payment thereof, a bill for the amount due:
Provided that no such bill shall be necessary in the case of—
(a) property tax payable on self-assessment of vacant land or covered
space in any building;
(aa) a tax on vehicles and animals;
(b) a theatre-tax; and
* * * * *
Setting forward 310. The Commissioner may, upon such terms as he thinks fit, allow any
of buildings to building to be set forward for the purpose of improving the regular line of a public
the regular line
street and may, with the sanction of the Standing Committee, by notice required any
of street.
building to be so set forward in the case of reconstruction thereof or of a new
construction.
Explanation:—For the purpose of this section a wall separating any premises
from a public street shall be deemed to be a building; and it shall be deemed a
sufficient compliance with permission or requisition to set forward a building to the
regular line of a street if a wall of such material and dimensions as are approved by
the Commissioner is erected along the said line.
* * * * *
79
330. (1) No person shall, without lawful authority, take away or wilfully or Pro hibition of
removal, etc., of
negligently break or throw down or damage—
lamps.
(a) any lamp or any appurtenance of any lamp or lamp post or lamp iron
set up in any public street or any public place;
(b) any electric wire for lighting such lamp;
(c) any post, pole, standard, stay, strut, bracket or other contrivance for
carrying, suspending or supporting any electric wire or lamp.
(2) No person shall wilfully or negligently extinguish the light of any lamp set
up in any public street or any public place.
* * * * *
337. (1) * * * * * When building
or work may be
(4) Before commencing the erection of a building or execution of a work
proceeded with.
within the period specified in sub-section (3), the person concerned shall give notice
to the Commissioner of the proposed date of the commencement of the erection of
the building or the execution of the work:
Provided that if the commencement does not take place within seven days of
the date so notified, the notice shall be deemed not to have been given and a fresh
notice shall be necessary in this behalf.
* * * * *
347D. (1) An appeal shall lie to the Administrator against an order of the Appeal against
Appellate Tribunal, made in an appeal under section 343 or section 347B, orders of
Appellate
confirming, modifying or annulling an order made or notice issued under this Act.
Tribunal.
* * * * *
(3) An order of the Administrator on an appeal under this section, and subject
only to such order, an order of the Appellate Tribunal under section 347B, and
subject to such orders of the Administrator or an Appellate Tribunal, an order or
notice referred to in sub-section (1) of that section, shall be final.
* * * * *
355. (1) * * * * * Collection and
removal of filth
(2) In such portion of Delhi and in any premises wherever situate in which there
and polluted
is a latrine, or urinal connected with a municipal drain, it shall not be lawful, except matter through
with the written permission of the Commissioner, for any person who is not employed municipal
agency.
by or on behalf of the Commissioner, to discharge any of the duties of scavengers.
* * * * *
361. (1) It shall not be lawful to erect any building or execute any work on or Latrines and
in relation to such building without providing such latrine accommodation and urinals, etc., in
new buildings.
urinal accommodation and accommodation for bathing or for washing clothes and
utensils on each floor of such building as the Commissioner may prescribe.
* * * * *
(3) It shall not be lawful to erect a residential building composed of separate
tenements on the flat system without providing at least one latrine and one bathing
or washing place for servants on the ground floor of such building or at any other
suitable place in the same premises.
* * * * *
396. (1) It shall be the duty of the father or mother of every child born in Delhi Information of
births and
and in default of the father or mother, of any relation of the child living in the same
deaths.
premises, and in default of such relation, of the person having charge of the child,
to give to the best of his knowledge and belief to the registrar of the area concerned
within eight days after such birth, information containing such particulars as may
be prescribed by bye-laws made in this behalf.
80
(2) It shall be the duty of the nearest relation present at the time of the death
or in attendance during the last illness of any person dying in Delhi and in default
of such relation, of any person present or in attendance at the time of the death, and
of the occupier of the premises in which to his knowledge the death took place and
in default of the person hereinbefore mentioned, of each inmate of such premises
and of the undertaker or other person causing the corpse of the deceased person to
be disposed of, to give to the best of his knowledge and belief to the registrar of the
area within which the death took place information containing such particulars as
may be prescribed by bye-laws made in this behalf.
* * * * *
Prevention of fire, etc.
Stacking or 400. The Commissioner may, by public notice, prohibit in any case where such
collecting prohibition appears to him to be necessary for the prevention of danger to life or
inflammable
property, the stacking or collecting of wood, dry grass, straw or other inflammable
materials.
materials, or the placing of mats or thatched huts or the lighting of fires in any place
which may be specified in the notice.
Care of naked 401. No person shall set a naked light on or near any building in any public
lights. street or other public place in such manner as to cause danger of fire:
Provided that nothing in this section shall be deemed to prohibit the use of
lights for the purposes of illumination on the occasion of a festival or public or
private entertainment.
* * * * *
Prohibition of 409. (1) No person shall keep open for public use any market in respect of
keeping market which a licence is required by or under this Act without obtaining a licence therefor,
open without
or while the licence therefor is suspended or after the same has been cancelled.
licence, etc.
(2) When a licence to open a private market is granted or refused or is
suspended or cancelled the Commissioner shall cause a notice of the grant, refusal,
suspension or cancellation to be posted in such language or languages as he thinks
necessary in some conspicuous place by or near the entrance to the place to which
the notice relates.
Prohibition of 410. No person knowing that any market has been opened to the public without
use of a licence having been obtained therefor when such licence is required by or under
unlicenced
this Act or that the licence granted therefor is for the time being suspended or that
markets.
it has been cancelled, shall sell or expose for sale any animal or article in such
market.
* * * * *
Power to expel 414. The person in charge of a market shall prevent the entry therein of, and
lepers and shall expel therefrom, any person suffering from leprosy in whom the process of
disturbers, etc.,
ulceration has commenced or from any dangerous disease, who sells or exposes for
from markets.
sale therein any article or who, not having purchased the same handles any articles
exposed for sale therein; and he may expel therefrom any person whom is creating
a disturbance therein.
* * * * *
Prohibition of 437. No person shall obstract or molest any person authorised or empowered
obstruction or
by or under this Act or any person with whom the Corporation or any of the
molestation in
execution of municipal authorities specified in section 44 has lawfully contracted, in the
work. execution of his duty or of anything which he is authorised or empowered or
required to do by virtue or inconsequence of any of the provisions of this Act or any
bye-law made thereunder, or in fulfilment of his contract, as the case may be.
* * * * *
81
Offences and Penalties
461. (1) Whoever— Punishment for
certain offences.
(a) contravenes any provision of any of the sections, sub-sections,
clauses, provisos or other provisions of this Act mentioned in the first column
of the Table in the Twelfth Schedule; or
(b) fails to comply with any order or direction lawfully given to him or
any requisition lawfully made upon him under any of the said sections, sub-
sections, clauses, provisos or other provisions, shall be punishable—
(i) with fine which may extend to the amount, or with
imprisonment for a term which may extend to the period, specified in
that behalf third column of the said Table or with both; and
(ii) in the case of a continuing contravention or failure, with an
additional fine which may extend to the amount specified in the fourth
column of that Table for every day during which such contravention or
failure continues after conviction for the first such contravention or
failure.
* * * * *
465. Whoever, in any case in which a penalty is not expressly provided by this General
penalty.
Act, fails to comply with any notice, order or requisition issued under any provision
thereof, or otherwise contravenes any of the provisions of this Act, shall be
punishable with fine which may extend to one hundred rupees, and in the case of a
continuing failure or contravention, with an additional fine which may extend to
twenty rupees for every day after the first during which he has persisted in the failure
or contravention.
* * * * *
2 of 1974. 466A. The Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973, shall apply to,— Certain
offences to be
* * * * * cognizable.
(b) an offence under sub-section (1) of section 317 or sub-section (1) of
section 320 or sub-section (1) of section 321 or sub-section (1) of section 325
or section 339 in relation to any street which is a public street,
as if it were a cognizable offence—
* * * * *
(ii) for the purposes of all matters other than—
(1) matters referred to in section 42 of that Code, and
(2) arrest of a person, except on the complaint of, or upon
information received from, such officer of the Corporation, not being
below the rank of a Deputy Commissioner, as may be appointed by the
Administrator:
* * * * *
Powers and duties of police officers
474. (1) Any police officer may arrest any person who commits in his view Arrest of
offenders.
any offence against this Act or against any rule, regulation or bye-law made
thereunder, if—
(a) the name and address of such person be unknown to him, and
(b) such person on demand declines to give his name and address or
gives a name and address which such officer has reason to believe to be false.
* * * * *
82
Duties of police 475. It shall be the duty of all police officers to give immediate information to
officers. the Commissioner of the commission of, or the attempt to commit any offence against
this Act or any rule, regulation or bye-law made thereunder and to assist all municipal
officers and other municipal employees in the exercise of their lawful authority.
* * * * *
Penalty for 482. (1) Any bye-law made under this Act may provide that a contravention
breaches of thereof shall be punishable—
bye-laws.
(a) with fine which may extend to five hundred rupees; or
(b) with fine which may extend to five hundred rupees and in the case of
a continuing contravention, with an additional fine which may extend to
twenty rupees for every day during which such contravention continues after
conviction for the first such contravention; or
(c) with fine which may extend to twenty rupees for every day during which
the contravention continues, after the receipt of a notice from the Commissioner
or any municipal officer duly authorised in that behalf, by the person contravening
the bye-law requiring such person to discontinue such contravention:
Provided that a contravention of any bye-law relating to the road transport
services may be punishable with imprisonment which may extend to three months,
or with fine which may extend to fifteen hundred rupees, or with both.
(2) Any such bye-law may also provide that a person contravening the same
shall be required to remedy so far as lies in his power, the mischief, if any, caused
by such contravention.
* * * * *
THE TWELFTH SCHEDULE
[See section 461]
PENALTIES
Explanation.—The entries in the second column of the following table headed
“Subject” are not intended as definitions of the offences prescribed in the provisions
mentioned in the first column or even as abstracts of those provisions, but are
inserted merely as reference to the subject thereof.
Table
Section, Subject Fine or Daily
sub-section, imprisonment fine
clause or which may be which
proviso imposed may be
imposed
1 2 3 4
Section 128, Failure to give notice of transfer Rs. 50 ...
sub-sections (1) or devolution of land or building.
& (2).
Section 128, Failure to produce instrument Rs. 50 ...
sub-section (3). of transfer.
Section 129 Failure to give notice of Rs. 50 ...
erection of new building, etc.
Section 130 Failure to give notice of Rs. 50 ...
demolition or removal of building.
Section 131 Failure to comply with requisition Rs. 50
to furnish information, etc.
Section 135, Wilful delay or obstruction of Rs. 50 ...
sub-section (2). valuers.
Section 143 Prohibition of advertisement Rs. 200 Rs. 50
without permission.
83
1 2 3 4
Section 168 Failure to give notice of vacant Rs. 50 Rs. 5
land or building.
Section 172, Non-compliance with the Rs. 50 ...
sub-section (2). requisition of attendance before
the Commissioner.
Section 175 Failure to disclose liability. Rs. 100 ...
Section 305, Construction of building within Rs. 1,000 Rs. 100
sub-section (3). the regular line of street without
permission.
Section 307 Failure to comply with Rs. 200 Rs. 50
requisition to set back buildings to
regular line of street.
Section 310 Failure to comply with Rs. 200 Rs. 10
requisition to set forward buildings
to regular line of street.
Section 313, Utilising, selling or otherwise Rigorous
sub-section (5). dealing with any land or laying out imprisonment
a private street otherwise than in which may
conformity with orders of the extend to three
Standing Committee. years.
Section 314, F a i l ure to comply with Rs. 50 Rs. 5
sub-section requisition to show cause for
(1), clauses alteration of street or for
(a) and (b). appearance before the
Commissioner.
Section 315, Failure to comply with Rs. 100 Rs. 10
sub-section (1). requisition on owner of private
street or owner of adjoining land or
building to level, etc., such street.
Section 317, Prohibition of projections upon Rs. 200
sub-section (1). streets, etc.
Section 317, Failure to comply with Rs. 200
sub-section (2). requisition to remove projections
from streets.
Section 318, Failure to comply with Rs. 200
sub-section (2). requisition to remove a verandah,
balcony, etc., put up in accordance
with section 317 (1).
Section 319 Failure to comply with Rs. 50
requisition to have ground floor
doors, etc., so altered as not to
open outwards.
Section 320, Erection, etc., of structures of Rs. 200 Rs. 10
sub-section (1). fixtures which cause obstruction in
streets.
Section 321 Deposit, etc., of things in Rs. 100
Streets.
84
1 2 3 4
Section 323, Tethering of animals and Rs. 100 Rs. 5
sub-sections milking of cattle in public streets.
(1) and (2).
Section 324, Unlawful removal of bar or Rs. 50
sub-section (4). shoring timber, etc., or removal or
extinction of light.
Section 325, Streets not to be opened or Rs. 200 Rs. 10
sub-section (1). broken up and building materials
not to be deposited thereon without
permission.
Section 327, Name of street and number of Rs. 50
sub-section (2). house not to be destroyed or
defaced, etc.
Section 328, Failure to comply with Rs. 100 Rs. 25
sub-section (1). requisition to repair, protect or
enclose a dangerous place.
Section 330, Removal, etc., of lamps. Rs. 100
sub-section (1).
Section 330, Wilfully and negligently Rs. 50
sub-section (2). extinguishing lights in public
streets, etc.
Section 332 Erection of a building without Simple
the sanction of the Commissioner. imprisonment
which may
extend to six
months or with
fine which may
extend to
Rs. 5,000 or
with both.
Section 333, Failure to give notice of Simple
sub-section (1). intention to erect a building. imprisonment
which may
extend to six
months, or with
fine which may
extend to
Rs. 5,000 or
with both.
Section 334, Failure to give notice of Simple
sub-section (1). intention to make additions, etc., to imprisonment
building. which may
extend to six
months, or with
fine which
may extend to
Rs. 5,000 or
with both.
Section 337, Commencement of work Rs. 10,000 Rs. 500
sub-section (4). without notice, etc.
85
1 2 3 4
Section 339 Failure to comply with Rs. 100 Rs. 5
requisition to round off buildings
at corners of streets.
Section 340, Erection of buildings on new Rs. 1,000
sub-section (1). streets without leveling.
Section 340, Erection of buildings or Rs. 1,000
sub-section (2). execution of work within regular
line of street or in contravention of
any scheme or plan.
Section 342 Use of inflammable materials Rs. 100
without permission.
Section 343 Failure to demolish buildings Simple
erected without sanction or imprisonment
erection of buildings in which may
contravention of order extend to six
months, or with
fine which may
extend to
Rs. 5,000 or
with both.
Section 344 Erection of buildings in Simple
contravention of conditions of imprisonment
sanction, etc. which may
extend to six
months or with
fine which may
extend to
Rs. 5,000 or
with both.
Section 345 Failure to carry out alterations. Simple
imprisonment
which may
extend to six
months or with
fine which may
extend to
Rs. 5,000 or
with both.
Section 346, Non-compliance with provision Rs. 200 Rs. 10
sub-sections as to completion certificates,
(1) & (2). occupation or use, etc., without
permission.
Section 347 Non-compliance with Simple
restrictions on user of buildings. imprisonment
which may
extend to six
months or with
fine which may
extend to
Rs. 5,000 or
with both.
86
1 2 3 4
Section 348, Failure to comply with Rs. 500 Rs. 20
sub-sections requisition to remove structures
(1) & (2). which are in ruins or likely to fall.
Section 349, Failure to comply with Rs. 200
sub-section (1). requisition to vacate buildings in
dangerous condition, etc.
Section 353 Failure to provide for Rs. 50
collection, removal and deposit of
refuse and provision of
receptacles.
Section 354 Failure to collect and remove Rs. 50
filth and polluted matter.
Section 355, Scavenger’s duties in certain Rs. 25
sub-section (2). cases not to be discharged by any
person without permission.
Section 356 Failure to comply with Rs. 100
requisition for removal of rubbish,
etc., from premises used as market,
etc.
Section 357, Keeping rubbish and filth for Rs. 50 Rs. 10
sub-section (1). more than twenty-four hours, etc.
Section 357, Allowing filth to flow in streets. Rs. 50
sub-section (2).
Section 357, Depositing rubbish or filth, etc., Rs. 50
sub-section (3). in street, etc.
Section 360, Latrines and urinals not to be Rs. 200
sub-section (1). constructed without permission or
in contravention of terms
prescribed.
Section 361, Failure to provide buildings Rs. 500
sub-section (1). newly erected or re-erected with
latrine, urinal and other
accommodation.
Section 361, Failure to provide residential Rs. 500
sub-section (3). buildings composed of separate
tenements with latrine, bathing or
washing place for servants on the
ground floor.
Section 362 Failure to provide latrines for Rs. 100 Rs. 20
premises used by large number of
people and to keep them clean and
in proper order.
Section 363 Failure to comply with Rs. 100 Rs. 20
requisition to provide latrines for
market, cattle shed, cart stand, etc.,
and to keep them clean and in
proper order.
87
1 2 3 4
Section 364, Failure to comply with Rs. 100 Rs. 10
clauses (a), requisition to enforce provision of
(b), (c) & (d). latrine or urinal accommodation,
etc.
Section 365, Failure to comply with Rs. 1,000
sub-section (2). requisition for removal of
congested buildings.
Section 366 Failure to comply with Rs. 1,000
requisition to improve buildings
unfit for human habitation.
Section 368, Failure to comply with order of Rs. 1,000
sub-sections demolition of buildings unfit for
(1), (2), (3) & human habitation.
(4).
Section 369 Failure to comply with Rs. 100 Rs. 15
requisition of the Commissioner to
remove insanitary huts and sheds,
etc.
Section 370, Prohibition against washing by Rs. 25
sub-section (1). washerman.
Section 371 Failure to give information of Rs. 100
dangerous disease.
Section 373 Failure to comply with Rs. 50
requisition to cleanse and disinfect
buildings or articles.
Section 374 Failure to comply with Rs. 50
requisition to destroy infectious
huts or sheds.
Section 375 Washing of clothing, bedding, Rs. 25
etc., at any place not notified by
the Commissioner.
Section 377, Sending infected clothes to Rs. 25
sub-section (1). washerman or laundry.
Section 377, Failure to furnish address of Rs. 25
sub-section (2). washerman or laundry to which
clothes have been sent.
Section 378, Use of Public conveyances by Rs. 50
sub-sections persons suffering from a
(1), (2) and (3). dangerous disease, etc.
Section 380 Failure to disinfect buildings Rs. 100
before letting the same.
Section 381 Disposal of infected articles Rs. 50
without disinfection.
Section 382 Making or selling of food, etc., Rs. 50
or washing of clothes by infected
persons.
88
1 2 3 4
Section 383 Sale of food or drink in Rs. 50
contravention of restriction or
prohibition of the Commissioner.
Section 384 Removal or use of water from Rs. 50
wells and tanks in contravention of
prohibition of commissioner.
Section 385 Exposure of persons to risk of Rs. 100
infection by the presence or
conduct of a person suffering from
a dangerous disease, etc.
Section 386 Removal of infectious corpses Rs. 50
in contravention of the provisions
of the section.
Section 387, Absence of sweepers, etc., from Imprisonment
sub-sections duty without notice. which may
(1) & (2). extend to one
month.
Section 388 A sweeper employed for doing Rs. 10
house scavenging not to
discontinue work without notice.
Section 389 Failure to supply information Rs. 50
by persons in charge of burning or
burial grounds.
Section 390 Use of new burning or burial Rs. 50
ground without permission.
Section 391, Failure to comply with Rs. 50
sub-section (1). requisition to close a burning or
burial ground.
Section 391, Burning or burial of corpses in Rs. 50
sub-section (2). a burning or burial ground after it
has been closed.
Section 392 Removal of corpses by other Rs. 25
than prescribed routes.
Section 393, Failure to give notice for Rs. 10
sub-section removal of carcasses of dead
(1), clause animals.
(b).
Section 396, Failure to give information of Rs. 50
sub-sections births and deaths.
(1) & (2).
Section 397, Commission of nuisances. Rs. 50
sub-sections
(1), (2) & (3).
Section 398 Failure to comply with Rs. 500 Rs. 25
requisition for removal or
abatement of nuisance.
89
1 2 3 4
Section 399, Dogs not to be at large in a steet Rs. 50
sub-section (4). without being secured by a chain
lead.
Section 399, Ferocious dogs at large without Rs. 100
sub-section (5). being muzzled, etc.
Section 400 Stacking inflammable material Rs. 50
in contravention of prohibition.
Section 401 Setting a naked light. Rs. 50
Section 402 Discharging fireworks, Rs. 50
firearms, etc., likely to cause
danger.
Section 403 Failure to comply with Rs. 50
requisition to render buildings,
wells, etc., safe.
Section 404 Failure to comply with Rs. 50
requisition to enclose land used for
improper purposes.
Section 406, Sale in municipal markets Rs. 200
sub-section (1). without permission.
Section 407, U se of places as private markets Rs. 500 Rs. 25
sub-sections without a licence and use of places
(1) & (2). other than a municipal slaughter
house as slaughter houses.
Section 407, Non-compliance with Rs. 50
sub-section (2) conditions imposed by
Proviso (a). Commissioner.
Section 409 Keeping market open without Rs. 2,000
licence, etc.
Section 410 Sale in unlicensed market. Rs. 50
Section 411 Carrying on business or trade Rs. 50
near a market.
Section 414 Failure of person in charge of Rs. 50
markets to expel lepers and
disturbers from the market.
Section 415 Carrying on butcher’s, Rs. 100 Rs. 10
fishmonger’s or poulterer’s trade
without licence etc.
Section 416 Establishment of factory, etc., Rs. 5,000 Rs. 500
without permission.
Section 417 Certain things not to be kept and Rs. 1,000 Rs. 100
certain trades and operations not to
be carried on without a licence.
Section 418, Keeping, abandonment or Rs. 100
sub-section (3). tethering of animals, etc.
90
1 2 3 4
Section 419, Use of premises in Rs. 500
sub-section (5). contravention of declaration.
Section 420 Hawking articles for sale Rs. 100
without a licence, etc.
Section 421 Keeping a lodging house, eating Rs. 100 Rs. 15
house, tea shop, etc., without
licence or contrary to licence.
Section 422 Keeping open theatre, circus or Rs. 500 Rs. 50
other place of public amusement
without licence or contrary to
terms of licence.
Section 430, Failure to produce licence or Rs. 50 Rs. 5
sub-section (5). written permission.
Section 431 Preventing the commissioner or Rs. 50
any person authorised in this
behalf from exercising his powers
of entry, etc.
Section 432 Preventing the Commissioner Rs. 50
or any person authorised in this
behalf from exercising his power
of entry upon any adjoining land.
Section 437 Obstruction or molestation in Rs. 200
execution of work.
Section 444, Failure to comply with Rs. 50
sub-section (4). requisition to state the name and
address of owners of premises.
Section 456, Failure of occupier of land or Rs. 200 Rs. 50
sub-section (3). building to afford owner facilities
for complying with provisions of
the Act etc., after eight days from
issue of order by district judge.
Section 495 Obstruction of Mayor or any Rs. 200
municipal authority, etc.
Section 496 Removal of any mark set up for Rs. 100
indicating level, etc.
Section 497 Removal, etc., of notice Rs. 50
exhibited by or under orders of the
Corporation, Commissioner, etc.
Section 498 Unlawful removal of earth, Rs. 50
sand or other material or deposit of
any matter or making of any
encroachment from any land
vested in the Corporation.
91
* * * * *
————
EXTRACTS FROM THE APPRENTICES ACT, 1961
(52 OF 1961)
* * * * *
30. (1) If any employer contravenes the provisions of this Act relating to the Offences and
number of apprentices which he is required to engage under those provisions, he penalties.
shall be given a month’s notice in writing, by an officer duly authorised in this behalf
by the appropriate Government, for explaining the reasons for such contravention.
(1A) In case the employer fails to reply the notice within the period specified
under sub-section (1), or the authorised officer, after giving him an opportunity of
being heard, is not satisfied with the reasons given by the employer, he shall be
punishable with fine of five hundred rupees per shortfall of apprenticeship month
for first three months and thereafter one thousand rupees per month till such number
of seats are filled up.
(2) If any employer or any other person—
(a) required to furnish any information or return—
(i) refuses or neglects to furnish such information or return, or
(ii) furnishes or causes to be furnished any information or return
which is false and which he either knows or believes to be false or does
not believe to be true, or
(iii) refuses to answer, or gives a false answer to any question
necessary for obtaining any information required to be furnished by him, or
(b) refuses or wilfully neglects to afford the Central or the State
Apprenticeship Adviser or such other person, not below the rank of an
Assistant Apprenticeship Adviser, as may be authorised by the Central or the
State Apprenticeship Adviser in writing in this behalf, any reasonable facility
for making any entry, inspection, examination or inquiry authorised by or
under this Act, or
(c) requires an apprentice to work overtime without the approval of the
Apprenticeship Adviser, or
(d) employs an apprentice on any work which is not connected with his
training, or
(e) makes payment to an apprentice on the basis of piecework, or
(f) requires an apprentice to take part in any output bonus or incentive
scheme,
(g) engages as an apprentice a person who is not qualified for being so
engaged, or
(h) fails to carry out the terms and conditions of a contract of
apprenticeship,
he shall be punishable with 3 fine of one thousand rupees for every occurrence.
(2A) The provisions of this section shall not apply to any establishment or
industry which is under the Board for Industrial and Financial Reconstruction
1 of 1986. established under the Sick Industrial Companies (Special Provisions) Act, 1985.
92
Penalty where 31. If any employer or any other person contravenes any provision of this Act for
no specific
which no punishment is provided in section 30, he shall be punishable with fine which
penalty is
shall not be less than one thousand rupees but may extend to three thousand rupees.
provided.
* * * * *
Power to make 37. (1) * * * * *
rules.
(2) Rules made under this Act may provide that a contravention of any such
rule shall be punishable with fine which may extend to fifty rupees.
* * * * *
————
EXTRACTS FROM THE TEXTILES COMMITTEE ACT, 1963
(41 OF 1963)
* * * * *
Power to 17. (1) * * * * *
prohibit exports
and internal (2) If any person contravenes any order issued under sub-section (1) prohibiting—
marketing of
textiles and * * * * *
textile
(b) the sale of any textiles or textile machinery for internal consumption,
machinery.
he shall, on conviction, be punishable,—
(i) for the first offence with imprisonment for a term which may
extend to one year or with fine or with both;
(ii) for the second or a subsequent offence with imprisonment for
a term which may extend to one year and also with fine and in the
absence of special and adequate reasons to be mentioned in the judgment
of the court, such imprisonment shall not be less than three months.
* * * * *
Offences by 18. (1) If the person committing any offence under this Act is a company,
companies. every person who, at the time the offence was committed was in charge of, and was
responsible to, the company for the conduct of business of the company, as well as
the company, shall be deemed to be guilty of the offence and shall be liable to be
proceeded against and punished accordingly:
Provided that nothing contained in this sub-section shall render any such
person liable to such punishment provided in this Act if he proves that the offence
was committed without his knowledge or that he exercised all due diligence to
prevent the commission of such offence.
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (1), where an offence
under this Act has been committed by a company, and it is proved that the offence has
been committed with the consent or connivance of, or is attributable to any negligence
on the part of, any director, manager, secretary or other officer of the company, such
director, manager, secretary or other officer shall also be deemed to be guilty of that
offence and shall be liable to be proceeded against and punished accordingly.
Explanation.—For the purposes of this section—
(a) “company” means a body corporate and includes a firm or other
association of individuals; and
(b) “director”, in relation to a firm, means a partner in the firm.
* * * * *
————
93
EXTRACTS FROM THE HANDLOOMS (RESERVATION OF ARTICLES FOR PRODUCTION)
ACT, 1985
(22 OF 1985)
* * * * *
10. Whoever produces any article or class of articles in contravention of an Penalty for
order made under section 3,— contravention
of orders made
(a) shall be punishable with imprisonment for a term which may extend under section 3.
to six months or with fine which may extend to five thousand rupees per loom
by which the said article or class of articles is produced, or with both, and in
the case of a continuing contravention, with an additional fine which may
extend to five hundred rupees per loom for every day during which such
contravention continues after conviction for the first such contravention; and
* * * * *
11. If any person,— False statement.
(a) when required by any order made under section 6 to furnish any
information or sample, makes any statement or furnishes any information
which is false in any material particular and which he knows, or has reasonable
cause to believe, to be false or does not believe it to be true, or fails to furnish
such sample or damages or destroys any article from which such sample was
required; or
(b) when required by the authorised officer under section 7 to produce
any books of account, registers, records or other documents, fails to produce,
or damages or destroys any such books, registers or other documents,
he shall be punishable with imprisonment for a term which may extend to three
months, or with fine which may extend to five thousand rupees, or with both.
* * * * *
————
EXTRACTS FROM THE AGRICULTURAL AND PROCESSED FOOD PRODUCTS EXPORT
DEVELOPMENT AUTHORITY ACT, 1985
(2 OF 1986)
* * * * *
CHAPTER V
CONTROL BY THE CENTRAL GOVERNMENT
19. (1) * * * * * Power to
prohibit or
(3) If any person contravenes any order made under sub-section (1), he shall, control imports
without prejudice to any confiscation or penalty to which he may be liable under the and exports of
Scheduled
provisions of the Customs Act, 1962, as applied by sub-section (2), be punishable with
52 of 1962. products.
imprisonment for a term which may extend to one year, or with fine, or with both.
* * * * *
CHAPTER VI
MISCELLANEOUS
22. Any person who, being required by or under this Act to furnish any return, Penalty for
fails to furnish such return or furnishes a return containing any particular which is false making false
reports.
and which he knows to be false or does not believe to be true shall be punishable with
fine which may extend to five hundred rupees.
94
Penalties for 23. Any person who—
obstructing a
member or (a) obstructs any member authorised by the Chairman in writing or any
officer of the officer or other employee of the Authority authorised in this behalf by the Central
Authority in the
Government or by the Authority, in the exercise of any power conferred, or in the
discharge of his
discharge of any duty imposed on him by or under this Act; or
duty and for
failure to
(b) having control over or custody of any account book or other record fails
produce books
and records. to produce such book or record when required to do so by or under this Act,
shall be punishable with imprisonment for a term which may extend to six months, or
with fine which may extend to one thousand rupees, or with both.
Other penalties. 24. Whoever contravenes or attempts to contravene or abets the contravention of the
provisions of this Act or of any rules made hereunder other than the provisions, the
punishment for the contravention whereof has been provided for in sections 19, 22 and 23,
shall be punishable with imprisonment for a term which may extend to six months, or with
fine which may extend to one thousand rupees, or with both and in the case of a continuing
contravention with an additional fine which may extend to fifty rupees for every day during
which such contravention continues after conviction for the first such contravention.
* * * * *
Jurisdiction of 26. No court inferior to that of a Metropolitan Magistrate or a Magistrate of the
court. first class shall try any offence punishable under this Act.
* * * * *
————
EXTRACTS FROM THE MOTOR VEHICLES ACT, 1988
(59 OF 1988)
* * * * *
Grant of 8. (1) * * * * *
learner’s licence.
(8) Any learner’s licence for driving a motor cycle in force immediately before
the commencement of this Act shall, after such commencement, be deemed to be
effective for driving a motor cycle with or without gear.
* * * * *
Grant of driving 9. (1) * * * * *
licence.
(9) Any driving licence for driving a motor cycle in force immediately before
the commencement of this Act shall, after such commencement, be deemed to be
effective for driving a motor cycle with or without gear.
* * * * *
Licensing and 12. (1) * * * * *
regulation of
schools or (4) A school or establishment imparting instruction in driving of motor
establishments vehicles or matters connected therewith immediately before the commencement of
for imparting
this Act whether under a licence or not, may continue to impart such instruction
instruction in
without a licence issued under this Act for a period of one month from such
driving of
motor vehicles. commencement, and if it has made an application for such licence under this Act
within the said period of one month and such application is in the prescribed form,
contains the prescribed particulars and is accompanied by the prescribed fee, till the
disposal of such application by the licensing authority.
* * * * *
Currency of 14. (1) * * * * *
licences to
(2) A driving licence issued or renewed under this Act shall,—
drive motor
vehicles.
* * * * *
95
(iv) has attained the age of fifty-five years on the date of issue or as the
case may be, renewal thereof, be effective for a period of five years from the
date of such issue or renewal.
15. (1) Any licensing authority may, on application made to it, renew a driving Renewal of
licence issued under the provisions of this Act with effect from the date of its expiry: driving licences.
Provided that in any case where the application for the renewal of a licence is
made more than thirty days after the date of its expiry, the driving licence shall be
renewed with effect from the date of its renewal:
* * * * *
20. (1) * * * * * Power of Court
to disqualify.
(2) Where a person is convicted of an offence under clause (c) of
sub-section (1) of section 132, section 134 or section 185, the Court convicting any
person of any such offence shall order the disqualification under sub-section (1),
and if the offence is relatable to clause (c) of sub-section (1) of section 132 or
section 134, such disqualification shall be for a period of not less than one month,
and if the offence is relatable to section 185, such disqualification shall be for a
period of not less than six months.
* * * * *
40. Subject to the provisions of section 42, section 43 and section 60, every Registration,
owner of a motor vehicle shall cause the vehicle to be registered by a registering where to be
made.
authority in whose jurisdiction he has the residence or place of business where the
vehicle is normally kept.
* * * * *
55. (1) If a motor vehicle has been destroyed or has been rendered permanently Cancellation of
incapable of use, the owner shall, within fourteen days or as soon as may be, report registration.
the fact to the registering authority within whose jurisdiction he has the residence or
place of business where the vehicle is normally kept, as the case may be, and shall
forward to that authority the certificate of registration of the vehicle.
* * * * *
65. (1) * * * * * Power of State
Government to
(2) Without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing power, such rules may make rules.
provide for—
* * * * *
(k) the amount or amounts under sub-section (13) of section 41 or
sub-section (7) of section 47 or sub-section (4) of section 49 or sub-section (5)
of section 50;
* * * * *
75. (1) * * * * * Scheme for
renting of motor
(2) A scheme made under sub-section (1) may provide for all or any of the cabs.
following matters, namely:—
* * * * *
(g) conditions subject to which motor cabs may be rented;
* * * * *
84. The following shall be conditions of every permit— General
conditions
* * * * * attaching to all
permits.
96
(f) that the provisions of Chapters X, XI and XII so far as they apply to
the holder of the permit are observed; and
* * * * *
Power of State 96. (1) * * * * *
Government to
make rules for (2) Without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing power, rules under this
the purposes of section may be made with respect to all or any of the following matters, namely:—
this Chapter.
* * * * *
(xii) the conditions to be attached to permits for the purpose of giving
effect to any agreement such as is referred to in clause (iii) of sub-section (1)
of section 67;
* * * * *
Transfer of 157. (1) * * * * *
certificate of
insurance. (2) The transferee shall apply within fourteen days from the date of transfer in
the prescribed form to the insurer for making necessary changes in regard to the fact
of transfer in the certificate of insurance and the policy described in the certificate
in his favour and the insurer shall make the necessary changes in the certificate and
the policy of insurance in regard to the transfer of insurance.
* * * * *
Application for 166. (1) * * * * *
compensation.
(3) No application for compensation shall be entertained unless it is made
within six month of the occurrence of the accident.
* * * * *
Option 167. Notwithstanding anything contained in the Workmen’s Compensation
regarding
Act, 1923, where the death of, or bodily injury to, any person gives rise to a 8 o f 1922.
claims for
claim for compensation under this Act and also under the Workmen’s Compensation
compensation
in certain cases. Act, 1923, the person entitled to compensation may without prejudice to the
provisions of Chapter X claim such compensation under either of those Acts but not
under both.
* * * * *
CHAPTER XIII
OFFENCES, PENALTIES AND PROCEDURE
General 177. Whoever contravenes any provision of this Act or of any rule, regulation
provision for
or notification made thereunder shall, if no penalty is provided for the offence be
punishment of
offences. punishable for the first offence with fine which may extend to five hundred rupees,
and for any second or subsequent offence with fine which may extend to one
thousand and five hundred rupees.
Penalty for 177A. Whoever contravenes the regulations made under section 118, shall be
contravention punishable with fine which shall not be less than five hundred rupees, but may
of regulations
extend to one thousand rupees.
under
section 118.
Penalty for 178. (1) Whoever travels in a stage carriage without having a proper pass or
travelling ticket with him or being in or having alighted from a stage carriage fails or refuses
without pass or to present for examination or to deliver up his pass or ticket immediately on a
ticket and for
requisition being made therefor, shall be punishable with fine which may extend to
dereliction of
duty on the part five hundred rupees.
of conductor
and refusal to Explanation.—In this section, “pass” and “ticket” have the meanings
ply contract respectively assigned to them in section 124.
carriage, etc.
97
(2) If the conductor of a stage carriage, or the driver of a stage carriage
performing the functions of a conductor in such stage carriage, whose duty is—
(a) to supply a ticket to a person travelling in a stage carriage on payment
of fare by such person, either wilfully or negligently,—
(i) fails or refuses to accept the fare when tendered, or
(ii) fails or refuses to supply a ticket, or
(iii) supplies an invalid ticket, or
(iv) supplies a ticket of a lesser value, or
(b) to check any pass or ticket, either wilfully or negligently fails or
refuses to do so,
he shall be punishable with fine which may extend to five hundred rupees.
(3) If the holder of a permit or the driver of a contract carriage refuses, in
contravention of the provisions of this Act or rules made thereunder, to ply the
contract carriage or to carry the passengers, he shall,—
(a) in the case of two-wheeled or three-wheeled motor vehicles, be
punishable with fine which may extend to fifty rupees; and
(b) in any other case, be punishable with fine which may extend to five
hundred rupees.
179. (1) Whoever willfully disobeys any direction lawfully given by any person Disobedience of
or authority empowered under this Act to give such direction, or obstructs any person orders,
obstruction and
or authority in the discharge of any functions which such person or authority is required
refusal of
or empowered under this Act to discharge, shall, if no other penalty is provided for the information.
offence be punishable with fine which may extend to two thousand rupees.
(2) Whoever, being required by or under this Act to supply any information,
wilfully withholds such information or gives information which he known to be
false or which he does not believe to be true, shall, if no other penalty is provided
for the offence, be punishable with imprisonment for a term which may extend to
one month, or with fine which may extend to two thousand rupees, or with both.
* * * * *
182B. Whoever contravenes the provisions of section 62A, shall be punishable Punishment for
with fine which shall not be less than five thousand rupees, but may extend to ten contravention of
section 62A.
thousand rupees.
* * * * *
186. Whoever drives a motor vehicle in any public place when he is to his Driving when
knowledge suffering from any disease or disability calculated to cause his driving mentally or
physically unfit
of the vehicle to be a source of danger to the public, shall be punishable for the first
to drive.
offence with fine which may extend to one thousand rupees and for a second or
subsequent offence with fine which may extend to two thousand rupees.
* * * * *
190. (1) Any person who drives or causes or allows to be driven in any public Using vehicle in
place a motor vehicle or trailer while the vehicle or trailer has any defect, which such unsafe condition.
person knows of or could have discovered by the exercise of ordinary care and which
is calculated to render the driving of the vehicle a source of danger to persons and
vehicles using such place, shall be punishable with fine of one thousand five hundred
rupees or, if as a result of such defect an accident is caused causing bodily injury or
damage to property, with imprisonment for a term which may extend to three months,
or with fine of five thousand rupees, or with both and for a subsequent offence shall
be punishable with imprisonment for a term which may extend to six months, or with
a fine of ten thousand rupees for bodily injury or damage to property.
98
(2) Any person who drives or causes or allows to be driven, in any public place
a motor vehicle, which violates the standards prescribed in relation to road safety,
control of noise and air-pollution, shall be punishable for the first offence with
imprisonment for a term which may extend to three months, or with fine which may
extend to ten thousand rupees or with both and he shall be disqualified for holding
licence for a period of three months and for any second or subsequent offence with
imprisonment for a term which may extend to six months, or with fine which may
extend to ten thousand rupees or with both.
* * * * *
Using vehicle 192. (1) Whoever drives a motor vehicle or causes or allows a motor vehicle
without to be used in contravention of the provisions of section 39 shall be punishable for
registration.
the first offence with a fine which may extend to five thousand rupees but shall not
be less than two thousand rupees for a second or subsequent offence with
imprisonment which may extend to one year or with fine which may extend to
ten thousand rupees but shall not be less than five thousand rupees or with both:
Provided that the court may, for reasons to be recorded, impose a lesser
punishment.
* * * * *
Offences 192B. (1) Whoever, being the owner of a motor vehicle, fails to make an
relating to application for registration of such motor vehicle under sub-section (1) of
registration.
section 41 shall be punishable with fine of five times the annual road tax or
one-third of the lifetime tax of the motor vehicle whichever is higher.
(2) Whoever, being a dealer, fails to make an application for the registration
of a new motor vehicle under the second proviso to sub-section (1) of section 41
shall be punishable with fine of fifteen times the annual road tax or the lifetime tax
of the motor vehicle whichever is higher.
* * * * *
Punishment of 193. (1) Whoever engages himself as an agent or canvasser in contravention
agents, of the provisions of section 93 or of any rules made thereunder shall be punishable
canvassers and for the first offence with fine of one thousand rupees and for any second or
aggregators
subsequent offence with imprisonment which may extend to six months, or with
without proper
authority. fine of two thousand rupees, or with both.
(2) Whoever engages himself as an aggregator in contravention of the
provisions of section 93 or of any rules made thereunder shall be punishable with
fine up to one lakh rupees but shall not be less than twenty-five thousand rupees.
(3) Whoever, while operating as an aggregator contravenes a condition of
the licence granted under sub-section (1) of section 93, not designated by the
State Government as a material condition, shall be punishable with fine of five
thousand rupess.
* * * * *
Driving vehicle 194. (1) Whoever drives a motor vehicle or causes or allows a motor vehicle
exceeding to be driven in contravention of the provisions of section 113 or section 114 or
permissible
section 115 shall be punishable with fine of twenty thousand rupees and an
weight.
additional amount of two thousand rupees per tonne of excess load, together with
the liability to pay charges for off-loading of the excess load:
Provided that such motor vehicle shall not be allowed to move before such
excess load is removed or is caused or allowed to be removed by the person in
control of such motor vehicle.
99
(1A) Whoever drives a motor vehicle or causes or allows a motor vehicle to
be driven when such motor vehicle is loaded in such a manner that the load or any
part thereof or anything extends laterally beyond the side of the body or to the front
or to the rear or in height beyond the permissible limit shall be punishable with a
fine of twenty thousand rupees, together with the liability to pay charges for
off-loading of such load:
Provided that such motor vehicle shall not be allowed to move before such
load is arranged in a manner such that there is no extension of the load laterally
beyond the side of the body or to the front or to the rear or in height beyond the
permissible limit:
Provided further that nothing in this sub-section shall apply when such motor
vehicle has been given an exemption by the competent authority authorised in this
behalf, by the State Government or the Central Government, allowing the carriage
of a particular load.
(2) Any driver of a vehicle who refuses to stop and submit his vehicle to
weighing after being directed to do so by an officer authorised in this behalf under
section 114 or removes or causes the removal of the load or part of it prior to
weighing shall be punishable with fine of forty thousand rupees.
194A. Whoever drives a transport vehicle or causes or allows a transport vehicle Carriage of
to be driven while carrying more passengers than is authorised in the registration excess
passengers.
certificate of such transport vehicle or the permit conditions applicable to such transport
vehicle shall be punishable with a fine of two hundred rupees per excess passenger:
Provided that such transport vehicle shall not be allowed to move before the excess
passengers are off-loaded and an alternative transport is arranged for such passengers.
194B. (1) Whoever drives a motor vehicle without wearing a safety belt or Use of safety
belts and the
carries passengers not wearing seat belts shall be punishable with a fine of one
seating of
thousand rupees: children.
Provided that the State Government, may by notification in the Official
Gazette, exclude the application of this sub-section to transport vehicles to carry
standing passengers or other specified classes of transport vehicles.
(2) Whoever drives a motor vehicle or causes or allows a motor vehicle to be
driven with a child who, not having attained the age of fourteen years, is not secured
by a safety belt or a child restraint system shall be punishable with a fine of one
thousand rupees.
194C. Whoever drives a motor cycle or causes or allows a motor cycle to be Penalty for
violation of safety
driven in contravention of the provisions of section 128 or the rules or regulations
measures for
made thereunder shall be punishable with a fine of one thousand rupees and he shall motor cycle
be disqualified for holding licence for a period of three months. drivers and pillion
riders.
194D. Whoever drives a motor cycle or causes or allows a motor cycle to be Penalty for not
wearing
driven in contravention of the provisions of section 129 or the rules or regulations
protective
made thereunder shall be punishable with a fine of one thousand rupees and he shall headgear.
be disqualified for holding licence for a period of three months.
194E. Whoever while driving a motor vehicle fails to draw to the side of the Failure to allow
free passage to
road, on the approach of a fire service vehicle or of an ambulance or other
emergency
emergency vehicle as may be specified by the State Government, shall be vehicles.
punishable with imprisonment for a term which may extend to six months, or with
a fine of ten thousand rupees or with both.
100
Use of horns and 194F. Whoever—
silence zones.
(a) while driving a motor vehicle—
(i) sounds the horn needlessly or continuously or more than
necessary to ensure safety, or
(ii) sounds the horn in an area with a traffic sign prohibiting the
use of a horn, or
(b) drives a motor vehicle which makes use of a cut-out by which
exhaust gases are released other than through the silencer,
shall be punishable with a fine of one thousand rupees and for a second or
subsequent offence with a fine of two thousand rupees.
* * * * *
Revision of
199B. The fines as provided in this Act shall be increased by such amount not
fines. exceeding ten per cent. in value of the existing fines, on an annual basis on 1st day
of April of each year from the date of commencement of the Motor Vehicles
(Amendment) Act, 2019, as may be notified by the Central Government. 32 of 2019.
* * * * *
Composition of 200. (1) Any offence whether committed before or after the commencement of
certain offences. this Act punishable under section 177, section 177A, section 178, section 179,
section 180, section 181, section 182, sub-section (1) or sub-section (3) or sub-section
(4) of section 182A, section 182B, sub-section (1) or sub-section (2) of section 183,
clause (c) of the Explanation to section 184, section 186, section 189, sub-section (2) of
section 190, section 192, section 192A, sub-section (3) of section 192B, section 194,
section 194A, section 194B, section 194C, section 194D, section 194E, section 194F,
section 196, section 198 and section 201, may, either before or after the institution of the
prosecution, be compounded by such officers or authorities and for such amount as the
State Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, specify in this behalf.
Provided that the State Government may, in addition to such amount, require
the offender to undertake a period of community service.
* * * * *
Power of Central 210C. The Central Government may make rules for—
Government to
* * * * *
make rules.
(b) such other factors as may be taken into account by the Court under
sub-section (3) of section 198A;
* * * * *
212. (1) * * * * *
Publication,
commencement (4) Every rule made by the Central Government under this Act, every scheme
and laying of
made by the Central Government under sub-section (1) of section 75 and
rules and
notifications. sub-section (1) of section 163 and every notification issued by the Central
Government under sub-section (4) of section 41, sub-section (1) of section 58,
sub-section (1) of section 59, the proviso to sub-section (1) of section 112,
section 118, sub-section (4) of section 163A, section 164, section 177A and
sub-section (4) of section 213 shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is made, before
each House of Parliament while it is in session for a total period of thirty days which
may be comprised in one session or in two or more successive sessions, and if,
before the expiry of the session immediately following the session or the successive
sessions aforesaid, both Houses agree in making any modification in the rule,
scheme or notification or both Houses agree that the rule or scheme should not be
made or the notification should not be issued, the rule, scheme or notification shall
thereafter have effect only in such modified form or be of no effect, as the case may
be; so, however, that any such modification or annulment shall be without prejudice
to the validity of anything previously done under that rule, scheme or notification.
* * * * *
————
101
EXTRACTS FROM THE NEW DELHI MUNICIPAL COUNCIL ACT, 1994
(44 OF 1994)
* * * * *
2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,— Definitions.
(1) “Administrator” means the Administrator of the National Capital
Territory of Delhi;
* * * * *
Property tax
61. (1) Save as otherwise provided in this Act, the property tax shall be levied Rates of
property tax.
on lands and buildings in New Delhi and shall consist of not less than ten and not
more than thirty per cent. of the rateable value of lands and buildings:
Provided that the Council may, when fixing the rate at which the property tax
shall be levied during any year, determine that the rate leviable in respect of lands
and buildings or portions of lands and buildings in which any particular class of
trade or business is carried on shall be higher than the rate determined in respect of
other lands and buildings or portions of other lands and buildings by an amount not
exceeding one-half of the rate so fixed:
Provided further that the tax may be levied on graduated scale, if the Council
so determines.
Explanation.—Where any portion of a land or building is liable to a higher
rate of the tax such portion shall be deemed to be a separate property for the purpose
of municipal taxation.
(2) The Council may exempt from the tax lands and buildings of which the
rateable value does not exceed one thousand rupees.
62. (1) Save as otherwise provided in this Act, the property tax shall be levied Premises in
respect of which
in respect of all lands and buildings in New Delhi except—
property tax is to
(a) lands and buildings or portions of lands and buildings exclusively be levied.
occupied and used for public worship or by a society or body for a charitable
purpose:
Provided that such society or body is supported wholly or in part by voluntary
contributions, applies its profits, if any, or other income in promoting its objects and
does not pay any dividend or bonus to its members.
Explanation.—“Charitable purpose” includes relief of the poor, education and
medical relief but does not include a purpose which relates exclusively to religious
teaching;
* * * * *
63. (1) The rateable value of any lands or building assessable to any property Determination of
taxes shall be the annual rent at which such land or building might reasonably be rateable value of
lands and
expected to let from year to year less a sum equal to ten per cent. of the said annual
buildings
rent which shall be in lieu of all allowances for cost of repairs and insurance, and assessable to
other expenses, if any, necessary to maintain the land or building in a state to property tax.
command that rent:
Provided that in respect of any land or building the standard rent of which has
been fixed under the Delhi Rent Control Act, 1958 (59 of 1958) the rateable value
thereof shall not exceed the annual amount of the standard rent so fixed.
(2) The rateable value of any land which is not built upon but is capable of
being built upon and of any land on which a building is in process of erection shall
be fixed at five per cent. of estimated capital value of such land.
102
(3) All plant and machinery contained or situate in or upon any land or building
and belonging to any of the classes specified from time to time by public notice by the
Chairperson with the approval of the Council, shall be deemed to form part of such land
or building for the purpose of determining the rateable value thereof under
sub-section (1) but save as aforesaid no account shall be taken of the value of any plant
or machinery contained or situated in or upon any such land or building.
* * * * *
Taxation of 65. (1) Notwithstanding anything contained in the foregoing provisions of this
Union
Chapter, lands and buildings being properties of the Union shall be exempt from the
properties.
property tax specified in section 61:
Provided that nothing in this sub-section shall prevent the Council from
levying property tax on such lands and buildings to which immediately before the
26th January, 1950, they were liable or treated as liable, so long as that tax continues
to be levied by the Council on other lands and buildings.
* * * * *
Incidence of 66. (1) The property tax shall be primarily leviable as follows:—
property tax.
(a) if the land or building is let, upon the lessor;
(b) if the land or building is sub-let, upon the superior lessor;
(c) if the land or building is unlet, upon the person in whom the right to
let the same vests:
Provided that the property tax in respect of land and building, being property
of the Union, possession of which has been delivered in pursuance of section 20 of
the Displaced Persons (Compensation and Rehabilitation) Act, 1954 (44 of 1954)
shall be primarily leviable upon the transferee.
(2) If any land has been let for a term exceeding one year to a tenant and such
tenant has built upon the land, the property tax assessed in respect of that land and the
building erected thereon shall be primarily leviable upon the said tenant, whether the
land and building are in the occupation of such tenant or a sub-tenant of such tenant.
Explanation.—The term “tenant” includes any person deriving title to the land
or the building erected upon such land from the tenant whether by operation of law
or by transfer inter vivos.
(3) The liability of the several owners of any buildings which is, or purports to be,
severally owned in parts or flats or rooms, for payment of property tax or any instalment
thereof payable during the period of such ownership shall be joint and several.
Apportionment 67. (1) If any land or building assessed to property tax is let, and its rateable
of liability for
value exceeds the amount of rent payable in respect thereof to the person upon
property tax
when the whom under the provision of section 66 the said tax is leviable, that person shall be
premises are let entitled to receive from his tenant the difference between the amount of the property
or sub-let.
tax levied upon him and the amount which would be leviable upon him if the said
tax was calculated on the amount of rent payable to him.
(2) If the land or building is sub-let and its rateable value exceeds the amount
of rent payable in respect thereof to the tenant by his sub-tenant, or the amount of
rent payable in respect thereof to a sub-tenant by the person holding under the
sub-tenant, the tenant shall be entitled to receive from his sub-tenant or the
sub-tenant shall be entitled to receive from the person holding under him, as the case
may be, the difference between any sum recovered under this section from such
tenant or sub-tenant and the amount of property tax which would be liable in respect
of the said land or building if the rateable value thereof were equal to the difference
between the amount of rent which such tenant or sub-tenant receives and the amount
of rent which he pays.
103
(3) Any person entitled to receive any sum under this section shall have, for
the recovery thereof, the same rights and remedies as if such sum were rent payable
to him by the person from whom he is entitled to receive the same.
* * * * *
69. Property tax due under this Act in respect of any land or building shall, Property tax a
first charge on
subject to the prior payment of the land revenue, if any, due to the Council or
premises on
Government or Central Government thereon, be a first charge— which it is
assessed.
(a) in the case of any land or building held immediately from the Council
or Government or Central Government, upon the interest in such land or
building of the person liable for such tax and upon the goods and other
movable properties, if any, found within or upon such land or building and
belonging to such person; and
(b) in the case of any other land or building, upon such land or building
and upon the goods and other movable properties, if any, found within or upon
such land or building and belonging to the person liable for such tax.
Explanation.—The term “property tax” in this section shall be deemed to
include the costs on recovery of property tax and the penalty, if any, payable as
specified in the bye-laws.
70. (1) Save as otherwise provided in this Act, the Council shall cause an Assessment list.
assessment list of all lands and buildings in New Delhi to be prepared in such form
and manner and containing such particulars with respect to each land and building
as may be prescribed by bye-laws.
(2) When the assessment list has been prepared the Chairperson shall give
public notice thereof and of the place where the list or a copy thereof may be
inspected, and every person claiming to be the owner, lessee or occupier of any land
or building included in the list and any authorised agent of such person, shall be at
liberty to inspect the list and to take extracts therefrom free of charge.
(3) The Chairperson shall, at the same time, give public notice of a date, not
less than one month thereafter, when he will proceed to consider the rateable values
of lands and buildings entered in the assessment list; and in all cases in which any
land or building is for the first time assessed, or the rateable value of any land or
building is increased, he shall also give written notice thereof to the owner or to any
lessee or occupier of the land or building.
(4) Any objection to a rateable value or any other matter as entered in the
assessment list shall be made in writing to the Chairperson before the date fixed in the
notice and shall state in what respect the rateable value, or other matter is disputed, and
all objections so made shall be recorded in a register to be kept for the purpose.
(5) The objections shall be inquired into and investigated, and the persons
making them shall be allowed an opportunity of being heard either in person or by
authorised agent, by the Chairperson or by any officer of the Council authorised in
this behalf by the Chairperson.
(6) When all objections have been disposed of, and the revision of the rateable
value has been completed, the assessment list shall be authenticated by signature of
the Chairperson or, as the case may be, the officer authorised by him in this behalf,
who shall certify that except in the case, if any in which amendments have been
made as shown therein, no valid objection has been made to the rateable value or
any other matter entered in said list.
(7) The assessment list so authenticated shall be deposited in the office of the
Council and shall be open, free of charge during office hours to all owners, lessees
and occupiers of lands and buildings comprised therein or the authorised agents of
such persons, and a public notice that it is so open shall forthwith be published.
104
Evidential value 71. Subject to such alterations as may thereafter be made in the assessment list
of assessment
under section 72 and to the result of any appeal made under the provisions of this
list.
Act, the entries in the assessment list authenticated and deposited as provided in
section 70 shall be accepted as conclusive evidence for the purpose of assessing any
tax levied under this Act, of the rateable value of all lands and buildings to which
such entries respectively relate.
* * * * *
Preparation of 73. It shall be in the discretion of the Chairperson to prepare for the whole
new assessment or any part of New Delhi, a new assessment list every year or to adopt the
list.
rateable value contained in the list for any year, with such alterations as may
in particular cases be deemed necessary, as the rateable value for the year
following, giving the same public notice as well as individual notices, to
persons affected by such alterations, of the rateable value as if a new
assessment list had been prepared.
* * * * *
Power of 77. (1) To enable him to determine the rateable value of any land or building
Chairperson to and the person primarily liable for the payment of property tax leviable in respect
call for
thereof, the Chairperson may require the owner or occupier of such land or building,
information and
returns and to or of any portion thereof to furnish him within such reasonable period as the
enter and inspect Chairperson fixes in this behalf, with information or with a written return signed by
premises.
such owner or occupier—
(a) as to the name and place of residence of the owner or occupier, or of
both the owner and occupier of such land or buildings;
(b) as to the measurements or dimensions of such land or building or of
any portion thereof and the rent, if any, obtained for such land or building or
any portion thereof; and
(c) as to the actual cost or other specified details connected with the
determination of the value of such land or building.
(2) Every owner or occupier on whom any such requisition is made shall be
bound to comply with the same and to give true information or to make a true return
to the best of his knowledge or belief.
(3) Whoever omits to comply with any such requisition or fails to give true
information or to make a true return to the best of his knowledge or belief, shall, in
addition to any penalty to which he may be liable, be precluded from objecting to
any assessment made by the Chairperson in respect of such land or building of which
he is the owner or occupier.
Premises owned 78. Notwithstanding that any land or building is owned by, or let to, two or
by, or let to two more persons in severalty, the Chairperson shall for the purpose of assessing such
or more persons land or building to property tax treat the whole of it as one property:
in severalty to be
ordinarily Provided that the Chairperson may, in respect of any land or building which
assessed as one
was originally treated as one property but which subsequently passes on by transfer,
property.
succession or in any other manner to two or more persons who divide the same into
several parts and occupy them in severalty, treat, subject to any bye-law made in
this behalf, each such several part, or two or more of such several parts together, as
a separate property and assess such part or parts to property tax accordingly.
Assessment in 79. If any land or building, bearing two or more municipal numbers, or
case of portions thereof, be amalgamated into one or more new premises, the Chairperson
amalgamation of
shall on such amalgamation assign to them one or more number and assess them to
premises.
property tax accordingly:
105
Provided that the total assessment on amalgamation shall not be greater than
the sum of the previous assessments of the several premises except when there is
any re-valuation of any of the said premises.
80. The Chairperson may in his discretion assess any outhouse appurtenant to Power of
Chairperson to
a building, or any portion of a land or building separately from such building or as
assess separately
the case may be, from the rest of such land or building. outhouses and
portions of
* * * * * buildings.
Tax on advertisements other than advertisements published in the newspapers
88. (1) Every person, who erects, exhibits, fixes or retains upon or over any Tax on
land, building, wall, hoarding, frame, post or structure or upon or in any vehicle any advertisements.
advertisement or, who displays any advertisement to public view in any manner
whatsoever, visible from a public street or public place (including any advertisement
exhibited by means of cinematographs), shall pay for every advertisement which is
so erected, exhibited, fixed or retained or so displayed to public view, a tax
calculated at such rates not exceeding those specified in the Fourth Schedule as the
Council may determine:
Provided that no tax shall be levied under this section on any advertisement which—
(a) relates to a public meeting, or to an election to Parliament or the
Legislative Assembly of Delhi; or
(b) is exhibited within the window of any building if the advertisement
relates to the trade, profession or business carried on in that building; or
(c) relates to the trade, profession or business carried on within the land
or building upon or over which such advertisement is exhibited or to any sale
or letting of such land or building or any effects therein or to any sale,
entertainment or meeting to be held on or upon or in the same; or
(d) relates to the name of the land or building upon or over which the
advertisement is exhibited, or to the name of the owner or occupier of such
land or building; or
(e) relates to the business of a railway administration and is exhibited
within any railway station or upon any wall or other property of a railway
administration; or
(f) relates to any activity of the Central Government or the Government
or the Council.
(2) The tax on any advertisement leviable under this section shall be payable
in advance in such number of instalments and in such manner as may be determined
by bye-law made in this behalf.
Explanation 1.—The word “structure” in this section includes any movable
board on wheels used as an advertisement or an advertisement medium.
Explanation 2.—The word “advertisement” in relation to a tax on
advertisement under this Act means any word, letter, model, sign, placard,
notice, device or representation, whether illuminated or not, in the nature of and
employed wholly or in part for the purposes of advertisement, announcement or
direction.
* * * * *
106
Payment and recovery of taxes
Time and 98. Save as otherwise provided in this Act, any tax levied under this Act shall
manner of
be payable on such dates, in such number of instalments and in such manner as may
payment of
taxes. be determined by bye-laws made in this behalf.
Presentation of 99. (1) When any tax has become due, the Chairperson shall cause to be
bill.
presented to the person liable for the payment thereof, a bill for the
amount due:
Provided that no such bill shall be necessary in the case of—
(a) a tax on vehicles and animals;
(b) a theatre-tax; and
(c) a tax on advertisements.
* * * * *
Penalty in case 101. (1) * * * * *
of default of
payment of (2) When the person liable for the payment of any tax is deemed to be in
taxes.
default under sub-section (1), such sum not exceeding twenty per cent. of the
amount of the tax as may be determined by the Chairperson, may be recovered from
him by way of penalty, in addition to the amount of the tax and the notice fee,
payable under sub-section (2) of section 100.
* * * * *
Remission or 110. (1) If any building together with land appurtenant thereto has remained
refund of tax. vacant and unproductive of rent for sixty or more consecutive days, the Chairperson
shall remit or refund, as the case may be, two-thirds of such portion of the property
tax assessed on the rateable value thereof, as may be proportionate to the number of
days during which the said building together with the land appurtenant thereto has
remained vacant and unproductive of rent.
(2) If any land, not being land appurtenant to a building, has remained vacant
and unproductive of rent for sixty or more consecutive days, the Chairperson shall
remit or refund, as the case may be, one half of such portion of the property tax
assessed on the rateable value thereof, as may be, proportionate to the number of
days during which the said land has remained vacant and unproductive of rent.
Power to require 111. (1) For the purpose of obtaining a partial remission or refund of tax, the
entry in
owner of a building composed of separate tenements may request the Chairperson,
assessment list
of details of at the time of the assessment of the building, to enter in the assessment list, in
buildings. addition to the rateable value of the whole building, a note regarding any detail of
the rateable value of each separate tenement.
(2) When any tenement, the rateable value of which has been thus separately
recorded has remained vacant and unproductive of rent for sixty or more consecutive
days, such portion of any tax assessed on the rateable value of the whole building
shall be remitted or refunded as would have been remitted or refunded if the
tenement had been separately assessed.
Notice to be 112. No remission or refund under section 110 or section 111 shall be made
given of the unless notice in writing of the fact that land, building or tenement has become vacant
circumstances in
and unproductive of rent has been given to the Chairperson, and no remission or
which remission
or refund is refund shall take effect in respect of any period commencing more than fifteen days
claimed. before delivery of such notice.
107
113. (1) For the purposes of sections 110 and 111 no land, building or What buildings
tenement shall be deemed vacant if maintained as a pleasure resort or town or are to be deemed
vacant.
country house or be deemed unproductive of rent if let to a tenant who has a
continuing right of occupation thereof, whether he is in actual occupation or not.
(2) The burden of proving the facts entitling any person to claim relief under
sections 109, 110 or section 111, shall be upon him.
114. The owner of any land, building or tenement in respect of which a Notice to be
given of every
remission or refund of tax has been given under section 110 or section 111, shall
occupation of
give notice of the re-occupation of such land, building or tenement within fifteen vacant land or
days of such re-occupation. building.
* * * * *
Taxes on entertainment and betting
125. The proceeds of the entertainment and betting taxes collected in New Payment of
U.P. Act 18 of Delhi under the provisions of the U. P. Entertainment and Betting Tax Act, 1937, as proceeds of
1937. entertainment
extended to the National Capital Territory of Delhi (which shall form part of the
and betting taxes
Consolidated Fund of the National Capital Territory of Delhi) reduced by the cost to Council.
of collection as determined by the Government shall, if the Legislative Assembly of
the National Capital Territory of Delhi by appropriation made by law in this behalf
so provides, be paid to the Council for the performance of its functions under
this Act.
* * * * *
214. The Chairperson may, upon such terms as he thinks fit, allow any Setting
forward of
building to be set forward for the purpose of improving the regular line of a public
buildings to
street and may, with the approval of the Council, by notice require any building to the regular line
be set forward in the case of reconstruction thereof or of a new construction. of street.
Explanation.—For the purpose of this section a wall separating any premises
from a public street shall be deemed to be a building, and it shall be deemed a
sufficient compliance with permission or requisition to set forward a building to the
regular line of a street if a wall of such material and dimensions as are approved by
the Chairperson is erected along the said line.
* * * * *
234. (1) No person shall, without lawful authority, take away or wilfully or Prohibition of
removal, etc., of
negligently break or throw down or damage—
lamps.
(a) any lamp or any appurtenance of any lamp or lamp post or lamp iron
set up; in any public street or any public place;
(b) any electric wire for lighting such lamp;
(c) any post, pole, standard, stay, strut, bracket or other contrivance for
carrying, suspending or supporting any electric wire or lamp.
(2) No person shall wilfully or negligently extinguish the light of any lamp set
up in any public street or any public place.
(3) If any person wilfully or through negligence or accident breaks, or causes
any damage to any of the things described in sub-section (1), he shall in addition to
any penalty to which he may be subjected under this Act, pay the expenses of
repairing the damage so done by him.
* * * * *
242. (1) * * * * * When building
or work may be
proceeded with.
108
(4) Before commencing the erection of a building or execution of a work
within the period specified in sub-section (3), the person concerned shall give notice
to the Chairperson of the proposed date of the commencement of the erection of the
building or the execution of the work:
Provided that if the commencement does not take place within seven days of
the date so notified, the notice shall be deemed not to have been given and a fresh
notice shall be necessary in this behalf.
* * * * *
Appeals against 254. (1) Any person aggrieved by any of the following orders made or notices
certain orders or issued under this Act, may prefer an appeal against such order or notice to the
notices issued
Appellate Tribunal, namely:—
under the Act.
* * * * *
(i) an order requiring the rounding off, splaying or cutting off the height
of a building intended to be erected, or for the acquisition of any portion of a
site, under section 244;
* * * * *
265. (1) * * * * *
Collection and
removal of filth
(3) In such portion of New Delhi and in any premises where situate in which
and polluted
matter. there is a latrine or urinal connected with a municipal drain, it shall not be lawful,
except with the written permission of the Chairperson, for any person who is not
employed by or on behalf of the Chairperson to discharge any of the duties of
scavengers.
* * * * *
Latrines and 272. (1) It shall not be lawful to erect any building or execute any work on or
urinals, etc., in in relation to such building without providing such latrine accommodation and
new buildings.
urinal accommodation and accommodation for bathing or for washing clothes and
utensils on each floor of such building as the Chairperson may prescribe.
(2) In prescribing any such accommodation, the Chairperson may determine
in each case—
(a) that such building shall be served by the flush system only;
(b) what shall be the site or position of each latrine, urinal, bathing or washing
place or site and their number on each floor and their clear internal dimensions.
(3) It shall not be lawful to erect a residential building composed of separate
tenements on the flat system without providing at least one latrine and one bathing
or washing place for servants on the ground floor of such building or at any other
suitable place in the same premises.
(4) In this section, the expression “to erect a building” has the same meaning
as in section 236.
* * * * *
Conditions of 299. No sweeper, being employed for doing house scavenging of any building
service of shall discontinue to do such house scavenging without reasonable cause or without
sweepers
having fourteen days, notice to his employer.
employed for
doing house
* * * * *
scavenging.
Disposal of dead animals
Disposal of dead 304. Whenever any animal in the charge of any person dies, the person in
animals.
charge thereof shall within twenty-four hours either—
109
(a) convey the carcass to a place provided or appointed under
section 263 for the final disposal of the carcasses of dead animals, or
(b) give notice of the death to the Chairperson whereupon he shall cause
the carcass to be disposed of on such fee as may be prescribed by the Council.
* * * * *
307. (1) It shall be the duty of the father or mother of every child born in New Information of
births and
Delhi and in default of the father or mother, of any relation of the child living in the
deaths.
same premises, and in default of such relation, of the person having charge of the
child, to give to the best of his knowledge and belief to the registrar of the area
concerned within eight days after such birth, information containing such particulars
as may be prescribed by bye-laws made in this behalf.
(2) It shall be the duty of the nearest relation present at the time of the death
or in attendance during the last illness of any person dying in New Delhi and in
default of such relation, of any person present or in attendance at the time of the
death and of the occupier of the premises in which to his knowledge the death took
place and in default of the person hereinbefore mentioned, of each inmate of such
premises and of the undertaker or other person causing the corpse of the deceased
person to be disposed of, to give to the best of his knowledge and belief to the
registrar of the area within which the death place information containing such
particulars as may be prescribed by bye-laws made in this behalf.
(3) If a birth or death occurs in the hospital, none of the persons mentioned in
sub-section (1) or, as the case may be, in sub-section (2) shall be bound to give
information required by that sub-section, but it shall be the duty of the medical
officer in charge of the hospital within twenty-four hours after the birth or death, to
send to the officer authorised by the Chairperson, a notice containing such
particulars as may be prescribed by bye-laws made in this behalf.
* * * * *
Prevention of fire, etc.
311. The Chairperson may, by public notice, prohibit in any case where such Stacking or
collecting
prohibition appears to him to be necessary for the prevention of danger to life or
inflammable
property, the stacking or collecting of wood, dry grass, straw or other inflammable materials.
materials, or the placing of mats or thatched huts or the lighting of fires in any place
which may be specified in the notice.
312. No person shall set a naked light on or near any building in any public Care of naked
street or other public place in such manner as to cause danger of fire: lights.
Provided that nothing in this section shall be deemed to prohibit the use of
lights for the purposes of illumination on the occasion of a festival or public or
private entertainment.
* * * * *
320. (1) No person shall keep open for public use any market in respect of Prohibition of
keeping market
which a licence is required by or under this Act without obtaining a licence therefor,
open without
or while the licence therefor is suspended or after the same has been cancelled. licence, etc.
(2) When a licence to open a private market is granted or refused or is
suspended or cancelled the Chairperson shall cause a notice of the grant, refusal,
suspension or cancellation to be posted in such language or languages as he thinks
necessary in some conspicuous place by or near the entrance to the place to which
the notice relates.
321. No person knowing that market has been opened to the public without a Prohibition of
licence having been obtained therefor when such licence is required by or under this use of
unlicensed
Act or that the licence granted therefor is for the time being suspended or that it has
markets.
been cancelled, shall sell or expose for sale any animal or article in such market.
* * * * *
110
Power to expel 324. The Chairperson may prevent the entry in any market and shall expel
disturbers, etc.,
therefrom, any person suffering from any dangerous disease, who sells or exposes
from markets.
for sale therein any article or who, not having purchased the same handles any article
exposed for sale therein; and he may expel therefrom any person who is creating a
disturbance therein.
* * * * *
Prohibition of 346. No person shall obstruct or molest any person authorised or empowered by
obstruction or or under this Act or any person with whom the Council has lawfully contracted, in the
molestation in
execution of his duty or of anything which he is authorised or empowered or required
execution of
work. to do by virtue or in consequence of any of the provisions of this Act, rules, regulations
or any bye-law made thereunder, or in fulfilment of his contract, as the case may be.
* * * * *
Recovery of certain dues
Mode of 363. In any case not expressly provided for in this Act or any bye-law made
recovery of thereunder any sum due to the Council on account of any charge, costs, expenses,
certain dues.
fees, rates or rent or on any other account under this Act or any such bye-law may
be recoverable from any person from whom such sum is due as an arrear of tax
under this Act:
Provided that no proceedings for the recovery of any sum under this section shall be
commenced after the expiry of three years from the date on which such sum becomes due.
* * * * *
Offences and penalties
Punishment for 369. (1) Whoever—
certain offences.
(a) contravenes any provision of any of the sections, sub-sections,
clauses, provisos or other provisions of this Act mentioned in the first
column of the Table in the Tenth Schedule; or
(b) fails to comply with any order or direction lawfully given to
him or any requisition lawfully made upon him under any of the said
sections, sub-sections, clauses, provisos or other provisions,
shall be punishable—
(i) with fine which may extend to the amount or with imprisonment for
a term which may extend to the period, specified in that behalf in third column
of the said Table or with both; and
(ii) in the case of a continuing contravention or failure, with an additional
fine which may extend to the amount specified in the fourth column of that
Table for every day during which such contravention or failure continues after
conviction for the first such contravention or failure.
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (1), whoever
contravenes the provisions of sub-section (1) of section 221, or sub-section (1) of
section 224, or sub-section (1) of section 225 or sub-section (1) of section 229 or
section 244, in relation to any street which is a public street, shall be punishable with
simple imprisonment which may extend to six months or with fine which may
extend to five thousand rupees or with both.
(3) Any member, referred to in clauses (b) and (d) of sub-section (1) of
section 4, who knowingly acquires, directly or indirectly, any share or interest in
any contract made with, or any work done for the Council, shall be deemed to have
committed offence made punishable under section 168 of the Indian Penal Code. 45 of 1860.
111
370. Whoever, in any case in which a penalty is not expressly provided by this General penalty.
Act, fails to comply with any notice, order or requisition issued under any provision
thereof, or otherwise contravenes any of the provisions of this Act, shall be
punishable with fine which may extend to one hundred rupees, and in the case of a
continuing failure or contravention, with an additional fine which may extend to
twenty rupees for every day after the first during which he has persisted in the failure
or contravention.
* * * * *
2 of 1974. 372. The Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973 shall apply to,— Certain offences
to be cognizable.
* * * * *
(b) an offence under sub-section (1) of section 221 or sub-section (1) of
section 224 or sub-section (1) of section 225 or sub-section (1) of section 229
or section 244 in relation to any street which is a public street.
as if it were a cognizable offence—
(i) for the purposes of investigation of such offence; and
(ii) for the purposes of all matters other than—
(1) matters referred to in section 42 of that Code, and
* * * * *
382. It shall be the duty of all police officers, to give immediate information Duties of police
to the Chairperson of the commission of, or the attempt to commit any offence officers.
against this Act or any rule, regulation or bye-law made thereunder and to assist all
municipal officers and other municipal employees in the exercise of their lawful
authority.
* * * * *
390. (1) Any bye-law made under this Act may provide that a contravention Penalty for
thereof shall be punishable— breaches of
bye-laws.
(a) with fine which may extend to five hundred rupees; and
(b) with fine which may extend to five hundred rupees and in the case of
a continuing contravention, with an additional fine which may extend to
twenty rupees for every day during which such contravention continues after
conviction for the first such contravention;
(c) with fine which may extend to twenty rupees for every day during which
the contravention continues, after the receipt of a notice from the Chairperson or
any municipal officer duly authorised in that behalf, by the person contravening
the bye-law requiring such person to discontinue such contravention:
Provided that a contravention of any bye-law relating to the road transport
services may be punishable with imprisonment which may extend to three months,
or with fine which may extend to fifteen hundred rupees, or with both.
(2) Any such bye-law may also provide that a person contravening the same
shall be required to remedy so far as lies in his power, the mischief, if any, caused
by such contravention.
* * * * *
112
THE TENTH SCHEDULE
[See section 369 (1)]
PENALTIES
Explanation.—The entries in the second column of the following table headed
“Subject” are not intended as definitions of the offences prescribed in the provisions
mentioned in the first column or even as abstracts of those provisions, but are
inserted merely as reference to the subject thereof:—
Table
Section, Subject Fine or Daily
sub-section, imprisonment fine
clause or which may be which
proviso imposed may be
imposed
1 2 3 4
Rs. Rs.
Section 74, Failure to give notice of transfer 50 —
sub-sections or devolution of land or building
(1)and (2)
Section 74, Failure to produce instrument 50 —
sub-section (3) of transfer
Section 75 Failure to give notice of 50 —
erection of new building, etc.
Section 76 Failure to give notice of 50 —
demolition or removal of building
Section 77 Failure to comply with 50 —
requisition to furnish information,
etc.
Section 81, Wilful delay or obstruction of 50 —
sub-section (2) valuers
Section 89 Prohibition of advertisement 200 5
without permission
Section 114 Failure to give notice of vacant 50 5
land or building
Section 119, Non-compliance with the 50 —
sub-section (2) requisition of attendance before
the Chairperson
Section 122 Failure to disclose liability 100 —
Section 148 Use for non-domestic purposes 100 5
of water supplied for domestic
purposes
Section 152, Non-compliance with the 200 20
sub-section (1) requisition to take water supply
Section 153 Prohibition to occupy new 200 20
premises without arrangement for
water supply
113
1 2 3 4
Rs. Rs.
Section 164 Waste or misuse of water 50 —
Section 165 Refusal of admittance, etc. 100 —
Section 168, Laying of water pipes, etc., in 100 10
sub-section (1) a position where pipes may
be injured or water therein
polluted
Section 168, Construction of latrines, etc., 100 —
sub-section (2) in a position where pipes may be
injured or water therein polluted
Section 173 Injury to, or interference with 50 —
free flow of contents of municipal
drain of drains communicating
with municipal drain
Section 174, Private drain not to be 50 —
sub-section (2) connected with municipal drain
without notice
Section 175 Non-compliance with requisition 100 25
for drainage of undrained premises
Section 176 Erection of new premises 1000 —
without drain
Section 177 Non-compliance with requisition 50 5
of maintenance of drainage works for
any group or block of premises
Section 178 Non-compliance with directions 50 5
to close or limit the use of private
drains in certain cases
Section 179 Non-compliance with 50 —
Chairperson’s orders regarding the
use of a drain by a person other
than the owner thereof
Section 180 Non-compliance with 50 —
requisition for keeping sewage and
rain water drains distinct
Section 181 Non-compliance with 50 —
requisition for the pavement of
courtyard, etc.
Section 183 Connection with municipal 200 50
water works or drains without
written permission
114
1 2 3 4
Rs. Rs.
Section 186, Non-compliance with 50 5
sub-section (4) requisition to close, remove or
divert a pipe or drain
Section 193, Execution of work by a person 200 —
sub-section (1) other than a licensed plumber
Section 193, Failure to furnish when 100 —
sub-section (2) required, name of licensed
plumber employed
Section 193, Licensed plumbers not to 100 —
sub-section (6) demand more than the charges
prescribed
Section 193, Licensed plumbers not to 100 —
sub-section (8) contravene bye-laws or execute
work carelessly or negligently, etc.
Section 194 Prohibition of wilful or 100 —
neglectful acts relating to water or
sewage works
Section 209, Construction of building within 1000 10
sub-section (3) the regular line of street without
permission
Section 211 Failure to comply with 200 50
requisition to set back buildings to
regular line of street
Section 214 Failure to comply with 200 10
requisition to set forward buildings
to regular line of street
Section 217, Utilising, selling or otherwise Rigorous —
sub-sections (5) dealing with any land or laying out imprisonment
a private street otherwise than in which may
conformity with orders of the extend to three
Council years
Section 218, Failure to comply with 50 5
sub-section requisition to show cause for
(1), clauses alteration of street or for a
(a) and (b) appearance before the
Chairperson
Section 219, Failure to comply with 100 10
sub-section (1) requisition on owner of private
street or owner of adjoining
land or building to level, etc., such
street
115
1 2 3 4
Rs. Rs.
Section 221, Prohibition of projections upon 200 —
sub-section (1) streets, etc.
Section 221, Failure to comply with 200 —
sub-section (2) requisition to remove projections
from streets
Section 222, Failure to comply with 200 —
sub-section (2) requisition to remove a verandah,
balcony, etc., put up in accordance
with section 221(1)
Section 223 Failure to comply with 50 —
requisition to have ground floor
doors, etc., so altered as not to
open outwards
Section 224, Erection, etc., of structures of 200 10
sub-section (1) fixtures which cause obstruction in
streets
Section 225 Deposit, etc., of things in 100 —
streets
Section 227, Tethering of animals and 100 5
sub-sections (1) milking of cattle in public streets
and (2)
Section 228, Unlawful removal of bar or 50 —
sub-section (4) shorting timber, etc., or removal or
extinction of light
Section 229, Streets not to be opened or 200 10
sub-section (1) broken and building materials not
to be deposited thereon without
permission
Section 231, Name of street and number of 50 —
sub-section (2) house not to be destroyed or
defaced, etc.
Section 232, Failure to comply with 100 25
sub-section (1) requisition to repair, protect or
enclose a dangerous place
Section 234, Removal, etc., of lamps 100 —
sub-section (1)
Section 234, Wilfully and negligently 50 —
sub-section (2) extinguishing lights in public
streets, etc.
116
1 2 3 4
Rs. Rs.
Section 237, Erection of a building without Simple —
sub-section (1) the sanction of the Chairperson imprisonment
which may
extend to six
months or with
fine which may
extend to
Rs. 5000 or with
both
Section 237, Use of inflammable materials 100 —
sub-section (2) without permission
Section 238, Failure to give notice of Simple —
sub-section (1) intention to erect a building imprisonment
which may
extend to six
months or with
fine which may
extend to
Rs. 5000 or with
both
Section 239, Failure to give notice of Simple —
sub-section (1) intention to make additions, etc., to imprisonment
buildings which may
extend to six
months or with
fine which may
extend to
Rs. 5000 or with
both
Section 242, Commencement to work 10000 500
sub-section (4) without notice, etc.
Section 244 Failure to comply with 100 5
requisition to round off buildings
at corners of streets
Section 245, Erection of buildings on new 1000 —
sub-section (1) streets without levelling
Section 245, Erection of buildings or 1000 —
sub-section (1) execution of work within regular
line of street or in contravention of
any scheme or plan
Section 247 Failure to demolish buildings Simple —
erected without sanction or imprisonment
erection of buildings in which may
contravention of order extend to six
months or with
fine which may
extend to
Rs. 5000 or with
both
117
1 2 3 4
Rs. Rs.
Section 248 Erection of buildings in Simple —
contravention of conditions of imprisonment
sanction, etc. which may extend
to six months or
with fine which
may extend to Rs.
5000 or with both
Section 249 Failure to carry out a alterations Simple —
imprisonment
which may
extend to six
months or with
fine which may
extend to
Rs. 5000 or with
both
Section 251, Non-compliance with provision 200 10
sub-sections (1) as to completion certificates,
and (2) occupation or use, etc., without
permission
Section 252 Non-compliance with Simple —
restrictions on user of buildings imprisonment
which may
extend to six
months or with
fine which may
extend to
Rs. 5000 or with
both
Section 258, Failure to comply with 500 20
sub-sections (1) requisition to remove structures
and (2) which are in ruins or likely to fall
Section 259, Failure to comply with 200 —
sub-section (1) requisition to vacate buildings in
dangerous conditions, etc.
Section 264 Failure to provide for 50 —
collection, removal and deposit of
refuse and provision of receptacles
Section 265, Failure to collect and remove 50 —
sub-section (1) filth and polluted matter
Section 265, Scavenger’s duties in certain 25 —
sub-section (3) cases not to be discharged by any
person without permission
Section 266 Failure to comply with 100 —
requisition for removal of rubbish,
etc., from premises used as
market, etc.
Section 267, Keeping rubbish and filth 50 10
sub-section (1) for more than twenty-four
hours, etc.
118
1 2 3 4
Rs. Rs.
Section 267, Allowing filth to flow in streets 50 —
sub-section (2)
Section 267, Depositing rubbish or filth, etc., 50 —
sub-section (3) in street, etc.
Section 271, Latrines and urinals not to be 200 —
sub-section (1) constructed without permission or
in contravention of terms
prescribed
Section 272, Failure to provide buildings 500 —
sub-section (1) newly erected or re-erected with
latrine, urinal and other
accommodation
Section 272, Failure to provide residential 500 —
sub-section (3) buildings composed of separate
tenements with latrine, bathing or
washing place for servants on the
ground floor
Section 273 Failure to provide latrines for 100 20
premises used by large number of
people and to keep them clean and
in proper order
Section 274 Failure to comply with 100 20
requisition to provide latrines for
market, cattle shed, cart stand, etc.,
and to keep them clean and in
proper order
Section 275, Failure to comply with 100 10
clauses (a), requisition to enforce provision
(b), (c) and of latrine or urinal accommodation,
(d) etc.
Section 276, Failure to comply with 1000 —
sub-section (2) requisition for removal of congested
buildings
Section 277 Failure to comply with 1000 —
requisition to improve buildings
unfit for human habitation
Section 279, Failure to comply with order of 1000 —
sub-sections (1), demolition of buildings unfit for
(2), (3) and human habitation
(4)
Section 280 Failure to comply with 100 15
requisition of the Chairperson to
remove insanitary huts and sheds,
etc.
Section 281, Prohibition against washing by 25 —
sub-section (1) washerman
119
1 2 3 4
Rs. Rs.
Section 282 Failure to give information of 100 —
dangerous disease
Section 284 Failure to comply with 50 —
requisition to cleanse and disinfect
buildings or articles
Section 285 Failure to comply with 50 —
requisition to destroy infectious
huts or sheds
Section 286 Washing of clothing, bedding, 25 —
etc., at any place not notified by
the Chairperson
Section 288, Sending infected clothes to 25 —
sub-section (1) washerman or laundry
Section 288, Failure to furnish address of 25 —
sub-section (2) washerman or laundry to which
clothes have been sent
Section 289, Use of public conveyances by 50 —
sub-sections (1), persons suffering from a
(2) and (3) dangerous disease, etc.
Section 291 Failure to disinfect buildings 100 —
before letting the same
Section 292 Disposal of infected articles 50 —
without disinfection
Section 293 Making or selling of food, etc., 50 —
or washing of clothes by infected
persons
Section 294 Sale of food or drink in 50 —
contravention of restriction or
prohibition of Chairperson
Section 295 Removal or use of water from 50 —
wells and tanks in contravention of
prohibition of Chairperson
Section 296 Exposure of persons to risk of 100 —
infection by the presence or
conduct of a person suffering
from a dangerous disease, etc.
Section 297 Removal of infectious corpses 50 —
in contravention of the provisions
of the section
Section 298, Absence of sweepers, etc., from Imprisonment —
sub-sections duty without notice which may extend
(1) and (2) to one month
120
1 2 3 4
Rs. Rs.
Section 299 A sweeper employed for 10 —
doing house scavenging not to
discontinue work without
notice
Section 300 Failure to supply information 50 —
by persons incharge of burning or
burial grounds
Section 301 Use of new burning or burial 50 —
ground without permission
Section 302, Failure to comply with 50 —
sub-section (1) requisition to close a burning or
burial ground
Section 302, Burning or burial of corpses in 50 —
sub-section (2) a burning or burial ground after it
has been closed
Section 303 Removal of corpses by other 25 —
than prescribed routes
Section 304, Failure to give notice for 10 —
clause (b) removal of carcasses of dead
animals
Section 307, Failure to give information of 50 —
sub-sections (1) births and deaths
and (2)
Section 308, Commission of nuisances 50 —
sub-sections (1),
(2) and (3)
Section 309 Failure to comply with 500 25
requisition for removal or
abatement of nuisance
Section 310, Dogs not to be at large in a 50 —
sub-section (4) street without being secured by a
chain lead
Section 310, Ferocious dogs at large without 100 —
sub-section (5) being muzzled, etc.
Section 311 Staking inflammable material 50 —
in contravention of prohibition
Section 312 Setting a naked light 50 —
Section 313 Discharging fireworks, 50 —
firearms, etc., likely to cause
danger
Section 314 Failure to comply with 50 —
requisition to render buildings,
wells, etc., safe
121
1 2 3 4
Rs. Rs.
Section 315 Failure to comply with 50 —
requisition to enclose land used for
improper purposes
Section 317, Sale in municipal markets 200 —
sub-section (1) without permission
Section 318, Use of places as private markets 500 25
sub-sections (1) without a licence and use of places
and (2) other than a municipal slaughter
house as slaughter houses
Section 318, Non-compliance with conditions 50 —
sub-section (2) imposed by Chairperson
proviso (a)
Section 320 Keeping market open without 2000 —
licence, etc.
Section 321 Sale in unlicensed market 50 —
Section 322 Carrying on business or trade 50 —
near a market
Section 324 Failure of person in charge of 50 —
markets to expel lepers and
disturbers from the market
Section 325 Carrying on butcher’s, 100 10
fishmonger’s or poluterer’s trade
without licence, etc.
Section 326 Establishment of factory, etc., 5000 50
without permission
Section 327 Certain things not to be kept and 1000 100
certain trades and operations not to
be carried on without a licence
Section 328, Keeping, abandonment or 100 —
sub-section (3) tethering of animals, etc.
Section 329, Use of premises in 500 —
sub-section (5) contravention of declaration
Section 330 Hawking articles for sale 100 —
without a licence, etc.
Section 331 Keeping a lodging house, eating 100 —
house, tea shop, etc., without
licence or contrary to licence
Section 332 Keeping open theatre, circus or 500 50
other place of public amusement
without licence or contrary to
terms of licence
Section 339, Failure to produce licence or 50 5
sub-section (5) written permission
122
1 2 3 4
Rs. Rs.
Section 340 Preventing the Chairperson or any 50 —
person authorised in this behalf from
exercising his powers of entry, etc.
Section 341 Preventing the Chairperson or 50 —
any person authorised in this
behalf from exercising his power
of entry upon any adjoining land
Section 346 Obstruction or molestation in 200 —
execution of work
Section 353, Failure to comply with 50 —
sub-section (4) requisition to state the name and
address of owner of premises
Section 364, Failure of occupier of land or 200 50
sub-section (3) building to afford owner facilities
for complying with provisions of
the Act, etc., after eight days from
issue of order by district judge
Section 404 Obstruction of Chairperson or a 200 —
member, etc.
Section 405 Removal of any mark set up for 100 —
indicating level, etc.
Section 406 Removal, etc., of notice 50 —
exhibited by or under orders of the
Council, Chairperson, etc.
Section 407 Unlawful removal of earth, 50 —
sand or other material or deposit of
any matter or making of any
encroachment from any land
vested in the Council.
———
EXTRACTS FROM THE ELECTRICITY ACT, 2003
(36 OF 2003)
* * * * *
Punishment for 146. Whoever, fails to comply with any order or direction given under this
non-compliance
Act, within such time as may be specified in the said order or direction or
of orders or
contravenes or attempts or abets the contravention of any of the provisions of this
directions.
Act or any rules or regulations made thereunder, shall be punishable with
imprisonment for a term which may extend to three months or with fine which may
extend to one lakh rupees, or with both in respect of each offence and in the case of
a continuing failure, with an additional fine which may extend to five thousand
rupees for every day during which the failure continues after conviction of the first
such offence:
Provided that nothing contained in this section shall apply to the orders,
instructions or directions issued under section 121.
* * * * *
123
152. (1) Notwithstanding anything contained in the Code of Criminal Compounding of
offences.
2 of 1974. Procedure, 1973, the Appropriate Government or any officer authorised by it in this
behalf may accept from any consumer or person who committed or who is
reasonably suspected of having committed an offence of theft of electricity
punishable under this Act, a sum of money by way of compounding of the offence
as specified in the Table below:
TABLE
Nature of Service Rate at which the sum of money for compounding
to be collected per Kilowatt (KW)/Horse Power
(HP) or part thereof for Low Tension (LT) supply
and per Kilo Volt Ampere (KVA) of contracted
demand for High Tension (HT)
(1) (2)
1. Industrial Service twenty thousand rupees;
2. Commercial Service ten thousand rupees;
3. Agricultural Service two thousand rupees;
4. Other Services four thousand rupees:
Provided that the Appropriate Government may, by notification in the Official
Gazette, amend the rates specified in the Table above.
* * * * *
———
EXTRACT FROM THE MICRO, SMALL AND MEDIUM ENTERPRISES DEVELOPMENT
ACT, 2006
(27 OF 2006)
* * * * *
27. (1) Whoever intentionally contravenes or attempts to contravene or abets Penalty for
the contravention of any of the provisions contained in sub-section (1) of section 8 contravention of
section 8 or
or sub-section (2) of section 26 shall be punishable—
section 22 or
section 26.
(a) in the case of the first conviction, with fine which may extend to
rupees one thousand; and
(b) in the case of second or subsequent conviction, with fine which shall
not be less than rupees one thousand but may extend to rupees ten thousand.
(2) Where a buyer contravenes the provisions of section 22, he shall be
punishable with fine which shall not be less than rupees ten thousand.
* * * * *
———
EXTRACTS FROM THE LEGAL METROLOGY ACT, 2009
(1 OF 2010)
* * * * *
2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,— Definitions.
* * * * *
(e) “import” with its grammatical variations and cognate expressions,
means bringing into India from a place outside India;
* * * * *
124
CHAPTER V
OFFENCES AND PENALTIES
Penalty for use 25. Whoever uses or keeps for use any weight or measure or makes use of any
of non-standard
numeration otherwise than in accordance with the standards of weight or measure
weight and
or the standard of numeration, as the case may be, specified by or under this Act,
measure.
shall be punished with fine which may extend to one lakh rupees and for the second
offence with fine which may extend to two lakh rupees and for the third and
subsequent offence, with fine which may extend to five lakh rupees.
Penalty for 26. Whoever tampers with, or alters in any way, any reference standard,
alteration of secondary standard or working standard or increases or decreases or alters any
weight and
weight or measure with a view to deceiving any person or knowing or having reason
measure.
to believe that any person is likely to be deceived thereby, except where such
alteration is made for the correction of any error noticed therein on verification, shall
be punished with fine which may extend to fifty thousand rupees and for the second
and subsequent offence with imprisonment for a term which shall not be less than
six months but which may extend to one year or with fine or with both.
Penalty for 27. Every person who manufactures or causes to be manufactured or sells or
manufacture or
offers, exposes or possesses for sale, any weight or measure which,—
sale of non-
standard weight (a) does not conform to the standards of weight or measure specified by
or measure.
or under this Act; or
(b) which bears thereon any inscription of weight, measure or number
which does not conform to the standards of weight, measure or numeration
specified by or under this Act,
except where he is permitted to do so under this Act, shall be punished with a fine
which may extend to one lakh rupees and for the second offence with fine which
may extend to two lakh rupees and for the third and subsequent offence, with fine
which may extend to four lakh rupees.
Penalty for 28. Whoever makes any transaction, deal or contract in contravention of the
making any standards of weights and measures specified under section 10 shall be punished with
transaction, deal
fine which may extend to fifty thousand rupees and for the second offence with fine
or contract in
contravention of which may extend to one lakh rupees and for the third and subsequent offence with
the prescribed fine which may extend to two lakh rupees.
standards.
Penalty for 29. Whoever violates section 11 shall be punished with fine which may extend
quoting or
to fifty thousand rupees for the second offence with fine which may extend to one
publishing, etc.,
of non-standard lakh rupees and for the third and subsequent offence, with fine which may extend
units. to two lakh rupees.
Penalty for 30. Whoever—
transactions in
(a) in selling any article or thing by weight, measure or number,
contravention of
standard weight delivers or causes to be delivered to the purchaser any quantity or number
or measure. of that article or thing less than the quantity or number contracted for or
paid for; or
(b) in rendering any service by weight, measure or number, renders that
service less than the service contracted for or paid for; or
(c) in buying any article or thing by weight, measure or number,
fraudulently receives, or causes to be received any quantity or number of
that article or thing in excess of the quantity or number contracted for or
paid for; or
(d) in obtaining any service by weight, measure or number, obtains that
service in excess of the service contracted for or paid for,
shall be punished with fine which may extend to ten thousand rupees, and, for the
second or subsequent offence, with imprisonment for a term which may extend to
one year, or with fine, or with both.
125
31. Whoever, being required by or under this Act or the rules made thereunder to Penalty for non-
production of
submit returns, maintain any record or register, or being required by the Director or the
documents, etc.
Controller or any legal metrology officer to produce before him for inspection any
weight or measure or any document, register or other record relating thereto, omits or
fails without any reasonable excuse, so to do, shall be punished with fine which may
extend to twenty-five thousand rupees and for the second offence with fine which may
extend to fifty thousand rupees and for the third and subsequent offence, with fine which
may extend to one lakh rupees.
32. Whoever fails or omits to submit model of any weight or measure for approval, Penalty for
failure to get
shall be punished with fine which may extend to twenty thousand rupees and for the
model approved.
second or subsequent offence, with imprisonment for a term which may extend to one
year and also with fine.
33. Whoever, sells, distributes, delivers or otherwise transfers or uses any Penalty for use
unverified weight or measure shall be punished with fine which shall not be less of unverified
weight or
than two thousand rupees but which may extend to ten thousand rupees and, for the
measure.
second or subsequent offence, with imprisonment for a term which may extend to
one year and also with fine.
34. Whoever sells, or causes to be sold, delivers, or causes to be delivered, any Penalty for sale
commodity, article or thing by any means other than the standard weight or measure or or delivery of
commodities,
number, shall be punished with fine which may extend to twenty-five thousand rupees
etc., by non-
and for the second offence with fine which may extend to fifty thousand rupees and for standard weight
the third and subsequent offence, with fine which may extend to one lakh rupees. or measure.
35. Whoever renders or causes to be rendered, any service through means Penalty for
other than the weight or measure or numeration or in terms of any weight, measure rendering
services by non-
or number other than the standard weight or measure, shall be punished with fine
standard weight,
which may extend to twenty-five thousand rupees and for the second offence with measure or
fine which may extend to fifty thousand rupees and for the third and subsequent number.
offence, with fine which may extend to one lakh rupees.
36. (1) Whoever manufactures, packs, imports, sells, distributes, delivers or Penalty for
selling, etc., of
otherwise transfers, offers, exposes or possesses for sale, or causes to be sold,
non-standard
distributed, delivered or otherwise transferred, offered, exposed for sale any p a c k a g e s .
pre-packaged commodity which does not conform to the declarations on the
package as provided in this Act, shall be punished with fine which may extend to
twenty-five thousand rupees, for the second offence, with fine which may extend to
fifty thousand rupees and for the subsequent offence, with fine which shall not be
less than fifty thousand rupees but which may extend to one lakh rupees or with
imprisonment for a term which may extend to one year or with both.
(2) Whoever manufactures or packs or imports or causes to be manufactured
or packed or imported, any pre-packaged commodity, with error in net quantity as
may be prescribed shall be punished with fine which shall not be less than ten
thousand rupees but which may extend to fifty thousand rupees and for the second
and subsequent offence, with fine which may extend to one lakh rupees or with
imprisonment for a term which may extend to one year or with both.
37. (1) Where any Government approved Test Centre contravenes any of the Penalty for
provisions of this Act or the rules made thereunder, or the conditions of the licence, contravention by
Government
it shall be punished with fine which may extend to one lakh rupees.
approved Test
(2) Where any owner or employee of a Government Approved Test Centre Centre.
performing duties in accordance with the provisions of this Act or the rules made
thereunder, wilfully verifies or stamps any weight or measure in contravention of
the provisions of this Act or the rules made thereunder, he shall, for every such
contravention, be punishable with imprisonment for a term which may extend to one
year or with fine which may extend to ten thousand rupees or with both.
38. Whoever imports any weight or measure without being registered under Penalty for
this Act shall be punished with fine which may extend to twenty-five thousand non-registration
by importer of
rupees and for the second or subsequent offence, with imprisonment for a term
weight or
which may extend to six months, or with fine, or with both. measure.
126
Penalty for 39. Whoever imports any non-standard weight or measure shall be punished
import of
with fine, which may extend to fifty thousand rupees and for the second or
non-standard
subsequent offence, with imprisonment for a term which may extend to one year
weight or
measure. and also with fine.
Penalty for 40. Whoever obstructs the Director, the Controller or any legal metrology officer
obstructing with intent to prevent or deter the Director or the Controller or any legal metrology
Director,
officer from exercising his powers or discharging his functions, or in consequence of
Controller or
legal metrology anything done or attempted to be done by the Director or the Controller or any legal
officer. metrology officer in the lawful exercise of his powers or discharge of his functions as
such, or whoever obstructs the entry of the Director or the Controller or any legal
metrology officer into any premises for inspection and verification of any weight or
measure or any document or record relating thereto or the net contents of any packaged
commodity or for any other purpose shall be punished with imprisonment for a term
which may extend to two years and for the second or subsequent offence, with
imprisonment for a term which may extend to five years.
Penalty for 41. (1) Whoever gives any information to the Director, the Controller or any
giving false
legal metrology officer, which he may require or ask for in the course of his duty,
information or
and which such person either knows or has reason to believe to be false, shall be
false return.
punished with fine which may extend to five thousand rupees and for the second or
subsequent offence with imprisonment for a term which may extend to six months
and also with fine.
(2) Whoever, being required by or under this Act so to do, submits a return or
maintains any record or register which is false in material particulars, shall be
punished with fine which may extend to five thousand rupees and for the second or
subsequent offence, with imprisonment for a term which may extend to one year
and also with fine.
* * * * *
Penalty for 45. Whoever, being required to obtain a licence under this Act or the rules
manufacture of
made thereunder, manufactures, without being in possession of a valid licence, any
weight and
measure without weight or measure, shall be punished with fine which may extend to twenty
licence. thousand rupees and for the second or subsequent offence, with imprisonment for a
term which may extend to one year, or with fine, or with both.
Penalty for 46. Whoever, being required to obtain a licence under this Act or the rules
repair, sale, etc., made thereunder repairs or sells or offers, exposes or possesses for repair or sale,
of weight and
any weight or measure, without being in possession of a valid licence, shall be
measure without
licence. punished with fine which may extend to five thousand rupees and for the second or
subsequent offence, with imprisonment for a term which may extend to one year, or
with fine, or with both.
Penalty for 47. Whoever alters or otherwise tampers, with any licence issued or renewed
tampering with under this Act or rules made thereunder, otherwise than in accordance with any
licence.
authorisation made by the Controller in this behalf, shall be punished with fine
which may extend to twenty thousand rupees, or with imprisonment for a term
which may extend to one year or with both.
48. (1) * * * * *
Compounding of
offences. (4) Nothing in sub-section (1) shall apply to person who commits the same or
similar offence, within a period of three years from the date on which the first
offence, committed by him, was compounded.
Explanation.—For the purposes of this sub-section, any second or subsequent
offence committed after the expiry of a period of three years from the date on which
the offence was previously compounded, shall be deemed to be a first offence.
* * * * *
Appeals. 50. (1) Subject to the provisions of sub-section (2), an appeal shall lie,—
* * * * *
127
(c) from every decision given by the Controller of Legal Metrology
under delegated powers of Director Legal Metrology to the Central
Government;
* * * * *
52. (1) * * * * * Power of the
Central
(3) In making any rule under this section, the Central Government may Government to
make rules.
provide that a breach thereof shall be punishable with fine which may extend to five
thousand rupees.
53. (1) * * * * * Power of State
Government to
(3) In making any rule under this section, the State Government may provide make rules.
that a breach thereof shall be punishable with fine which may extend to five
thousand rupees.
* * * * *
———
EXTRACT FROM THE JAN VISHWAS (AMENDMENT OF PROVISIONS) ACT, 2023
(18 OF 2023)
* * * * *
3. The fines and penalties provided under various provisions in the enactments Revision of fines
mentioned in the Schedule shall be increased by ten per cent. of the minimum and penalties.
amount of fine or penalty, as the case may be, prescribed therefor, after the expiry
of every three years from the date of commencement of this Act.
* * * * *
LOK SABHA
————
A
BILL
to amend certain enactments for decriminalising and rationalising offences to
further enhance trust-based governance for ease of living and doing business.
————
(Shri Piyush Goyal, Minister of Commerce and Industry)
