AS PASSED BY LOK SABHA ON 11.08.2025
Bill No. 77-C of 2025
THE NATIONAL ANTI-DOPING (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2025
A
BILL
to amend the National Anti-Doping Act, 2022.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Seventy-sixth Year of the Republic of
India as follows:—
1.(1) This Act may be called the National Anti-Doping (Amendment) Act, 2025. Short title and
commencement.
(2) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by
5 notification in the Official Gazette, appoint.
15 of 2022. 2.Section 2 of the National Anti-Doping Act, 2022 (hereinafter referred to as Amendment of
the principal Act) shall be numbered as sub-section (1) thereof and in section 2.
sub-section (1) as so numbered,—
2
(i)after clause (a), the following clause shall be inserted, namely:—
‘(aa) “Anti-Doping Organisation” means the World Anti-Doping
Agency or a signatory to the Code which is responsible for adopting
rules for initiating, implementing or enforcing any part of the doping
control process and includes the International Olympic Committee, the 5
International Paralympic Committee, other major event organisations
that conduct testing at their events, International Federations, and the
National Anti-Doping Organisations;’;
(ii)in clause (b), after the word and figure “section 4”, the words “or as
detailed under the Code as set out in the Schedule” shall be inserted;
10
(iii) in clause (e), for the words “or such other person”, the words
“, parent or any other person” shall be substituted;
(iv)in clause (n),––
(a) for the words “up to the disposal”, the words “till the final
disposal” shall be substituted; 15
(b) after the words “Anti-Doping Rule Violation”, the words “or
violation of the prohibition of participation during ineligibility or
provisional suspension” shall be inserted;
(v)for clause (q), the following clause shall be substituted, namely:—
‘(q) “in-competition” means the period commencing at 20
11:59 p.m. on the day before a competition in which the athlete is
scheduled to participate till the end of such competition and the sample
collection process related to such competition;’;
(vi)after clause (s), the following clause shall be inserted, namely:—
‘(sa) “marker” means a compound, group of compounds or 25
biological variable that indicates the use of a prohibited substance or a
prohibited method;’;
(vii)after clause (t), the following clause shall be inserted, namely:—
‘(ta) “metabolite” means any substance produced by a
biotransformation process;’;
30
(viii)clause (w) shall be omitted;
(ix)for clause (x), the following clause shall be substituted, namely:—
‘(x) “out-of-competition” means any period which is not
in-competition;’;
(x) in clause (zc), after the words “any substance”, the words “or class 35
of substances” shall be inserted;
(xi)in clause (zg), the words “and testing of samples” shall be omitted;
(xii) after sub-section (1) as so numbered, the following sub-section
shall be inserted, namely:—
“(2) The words and expressions used in this Act and not defined 40
but defined in the Code shall have the same meanings respectively
assigned to them in that Code.”.
Insertion of new 3.After section 2 of the principal Act, the following section shall be inserted,
section 2A. namely:—
Application of “2A. (1) Notwithstanding anything to the contrary contained in any 45
World other law, such of the provisions of the World Anti-Doping Code as are set
Anti-Doping out in the Schedule shall have the force of law in India.
Code.
3
(2) The Central Government may, from time to time, by notification in
the Official Gazette, amend the Schedule in conformity with any
amendments, duly made and adopted, of the provisions of the said Code set
out therein.
5 (3)Every notification issued under sub-section (2) shall be laid, as soon
as may be after it is issued, before each House of Parliament.”.
4. For section 4 of the principal Act, the following section shall be Substitution of
substituted, namely:— new section for
section 4.
“4. Any one or more of the following circumstances or acts or Anti-Doping Rule
10 conducts shall constitute Anti-Doping Rule Violation for the purposes of this Violation.
Act, namely:—
(a) the presence of a prohibited substance or its metabolites or
markers in an athlete’s sample, unless such presence is exempted under
section 5;
15 (b)use or attempted use by an athlete of any prohibited substance
or any prohibited method, unless such use is exempted under section 5;
(c) evading sample collection; or refusing or failing to submit to
sample collection without compelling justification after notification by
a duly authorised person;
20 (d)whereabouts failures by an athlete as specified in the Code;
(e) tampering or attempted tampering with any part of doping
control by an athlete or other person;
(f) possession of any prohibited substance or any prohibited
method by an athlete or athlete support personnel, unless such
possession is exempted under section 5;
25
(g) trafficking or attempted trafficking in any prohibited
substance or prohibited method by an athlete or other person;
(h) administration or attempted administration by an athlete or
other person to any athlete in-competition of any prohibited substance
or prohibited method, or administration or attempted administration to
30
any athlete out-of-competition of any prohibited substance or any
prohibited method that is prohibited out-of-competition;
(i) assisting, encouraging, aiding, abetting, conspiring, covering
up or any other type of intentional complicity or attempted complicity
35 involving an Anti-Doping Rule Violation, attempted Anti-Doping Rule
Violation or violation of the prohibition against participation during
ineligibility or provisional suspension by any other person;
(j) prohibited association by an athlete or other person as the
Agency may specify by regulations;
(k) acts by an athlete or other person to discourage or retaliate
40
against reporting to authorities.”.
5. In section 6 of the principal Act, in sub-section (1), for the words Amendment of
“individual athlete or athlete support personnel”, the words “athlete or other section 6.
person” shall be substituted.
45 6. In section 7 of the principal Act, in sub-section (7), after the words Amendment of
“International Federation”, the words “, National Olympic Committee, National section 7.
Paralympic Committee” shall be inserted.
7.In section 10 of the principal Act, sub-section (5) shall be omitted. Amendment of
section 10.
4
Amendment of 8.In section 11 of the principal Act, in sub-section (2), in clause (d), after the
section 11.
words “who are”, the words “or have been” shall be inserted.
Amendment of 9.In section 12 of the principal Act,—
section 12.
(a) for the word “Board”, wherever it occurs, the words “Central
Government” shall be substituted; 5
(b) for the words “specified by regulations”, wherever they occur, the
word “prescribed” shall be substituted.
Amendment of 10. In section 14 of the principal Act, after sub-section (6), the following
section 14.
sub-section shall be inserted, namely:––
“(7) The Director General or any other staff member of the Agency 10
shall have operational independence from any National Sports Federation,
International Federation, National Olympic Committee, National Paralympic
Committee or any Government department or agency with responsibility for
sport or anti-doping.”.
Amendment of 11.In section 16 of the principal Act, in sub-section (3),–– 15
section 16.
(a)for clause (i), the following clause shall be substituted, namely:–––
“(i) coordinating and cooperating with the Anti-Doping
Organisations and National Sports Federations;”;
(b)in clause (k), the word “Other” shall be omitted.
Amendment of 12. In section 17 of the principal Act, for the words “Therapeutic 20
section 17. Exemption”, the words “Therapeutic Use Exemption” shall be substituted.
Amendment of 13.In section 19 of the principal Act, for the words and figures “the Code of
section 19. Criminal Procedure, 1973”, the words and figures “the Bharatiya Nagarik 2 of 1974.
Suraksha Sanhita, 2023” shall be substituted. 46 of 2023.
Substitution of 14. For section 20 of the principal Act, the following section shall be 25
new section for substituted, namely:––
section 20.
Power of “20. Notwithstanding the power of the Agency to direct the collection
collecting of samples of an athlete at any time and at any place, if the Agency has
samples and
reasons to believe that an athlete has committed an Anti-Doping Rule
testing.
Violation, it shall require such athlete to submit samples for testing, in 30
accordance with such procedure and in such manner, as may be specified by
regulations.”.
Substitution of 15. For section 21 of the principal Act, the following section shall be
new section for substituted, namely:––
section 21.
Result “21. (1) After receiving an adverse report from a dope testing laboratory 35
Management indicating presence of any prohibited substance or its metabolites or markers in the
process.
sample of an athlete or evidence of the use of a prohibited method, the Agency
shall carry out initial examination of the report in such manner as may be specified
by regulations and verify, if Therapeutic Use Exemption has been granted to such
athlete in respect of such substance or if there has been any departure from the 40
International Standard for Laboratories or International Standard for Testing and
Investigations that may have caused the adverse analytical finding or if it is
apparent that the adverse analytical finding was caused by an ingestion of the
relevant prohibited substance through a permitted route.
(2)Where, after examination and verification under sub-section (1), the 45
Agency is satisfied that no Therapeutic Use Exemption has been granted to
the athlete and that there has been no departure from the International
Standard for Laboratories or International Standard for Testing and
Investigations that may have caused the adverse analytical finding or that the
adverse analytical finding was not caused by an ingestion of the relevant 50
prohibited substance through a permitted route, it shall take such actions in
such manner, as may be specified by regulations.”.
5
16.In section 23 of the principal Act,— Amendment of
section 23.
(a) for the words “specified by regulations”, wherever they occur, the
word “prescribed” shall be substituted;
(b)in sub-section (2), for the words “regulations as may be made by the
5 Board”, the words “rules as may be made by the Central Government” shall
be substituted;
(c) for sub-section (9) and the Explanation, the following sub-sections
and Explanation shall be substituted, namely:—
‘(9) The World Anti-Doping Agency, the International Olympic
10 Committee, the International Paralympic Committee and the concerned
International Federation may prefer an appeal against the decision of
the Appeal Panel to the Court of Arbitration for Sport, in accordance
with the rules of the Court of Arbitration for Sport and the Code.
(10) Where the case involves international level athlete or
15 international events,—
(a) such athlete or other person who is subject to the
decision being appealed;
(b)the National Anti-Doping Agency;
(c)the International Federation;
20 (d)the World Anti-Doping Agency; and
(e) the International Olympic Committee or the
International Paralympic Committee, as the case may be, where
the decision may have an effect in relation to the Olympic Games
or the Paralympic Games including decisions affecting eligibility
25 for the Olympic Games or the Paralympic Games,
may appeal against the decision of the Disciplinary Panel to the Court
of Arbitration for Sport.
(11) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-sections (1) to
(10), in cases where the World Anti-Doping Agency has a right to
30 appeal under Article 13 of the Code and no appeal has been filed by
any party against the final decision of the Agency, the World
Anti-Doping Agency may appeal against such decision to the Court of
Arbitration for Sport without exhausting other remedies provided under
this Act and the rules made thereunder.
35 Explanation.—For the purposes of sub-sections (9) to (11),
“Court of Arbitration for Sport” means an international body
established in 1984 to settle disputes related to sport through arbitration
whose headquarter is in Lausanne, Switzerland.’.
17. In section 24 of the principal Act, after the word “Board,”, the words Amendment of
section 24.
40 “ Appeal Panel,” shall be inserted.
Amendment of
18.In section 26 of the principal Act,––
section 26.
(a) in sub-section (2), in the proviso, for the words “may, if required,”,
the word “shall” shall be substituted;
(b)in sub-section (4), in clause (d), after the words “standard operative
45 procedures”, the words “, subject to the International Standard for
Laboratories” shall be inserted.
19.In section 29 of the principal Act,–– Amendment of
section 29.
(i)after clause (c), the following clauses shall be inserted, namely:—
6
“(ca) the manner of constituting the Appeal Panel under
sub-section (1) of section 12;
(cb) the manner of appointment of the Chairperson,
Vice-Chairperson and other members of the Appeal Panel and the
conditions subject to which such appointments shall be made under 5
sub-section (3) of section 12;
(cc) the grounds on which a member of the Appeal Panel may be
removed under sub-section (4) of section 12;”;
(ii)after clause (f), the following clauses shall be inserted, namely:—
“(fa) the other decisions against which an appeal may be filed, 10
and the form and manner in which and the time within which such
appeal may be filed under sub-section (1) of section 23;
(fb) the procedure to be followed by the Appeal Panel under
sub-section (2) of section 23;
(fc) the manner of communicating the decision of the Appeal 15
Panel under sub-section (8) of section 23;”;
(iii) in clause (m), after the word and figures “section 26”, the words
“, subject to the International Standard for Laboratories” shall be inserted.
Amendment of 20.In section 30 of the principal Act,––
section 30.
20
(i)clauses (e), (f) and (g) shall be omitted;
(ii)clauses (l), (m) and (n) shall be omitted.
Amendment of 21.In section 31 of the principal Act,—
section 31.
(a)in sub-section (1),––
(i) in the opening portion, for the words “for complying with the
requirements of international obligations and commitments including the 25
Code”, the words “in compliance with the international obligations and the
Code, including its International Standards,” shall be substituted;
(ii) in clause (j), for the words “anti-doping control”, the words
“doping control” shall be substituted;
(iii)in clause (m), the word “other” shall be omitted; 30
(b)in sub-section (2),–––
(i)clause (b) shall be omitted;
(ii) for clause (c), the following clause shall be substituted,
namely:—
“(c) the prohibited association by an athlete or other person 35
under clause (j) of section 4;”;
(iii)clause (d) shall be omitted.
22. After section 34 of the principal Act, the following Schedule shall be
Insertion of
Schedule. inserted, namely:––
“THE SCHEDULE 40
(See section 2A)
PROVISIONS OF THE WORLD ANTI-DOPING CODE, WHICH SHALL HAVE
FORCE OF LAW
ARTICLE 2 ANTI-DOPING RULE VIOLATIONS
The purpose of Article 2 is to specify the circumstances and conduct which 45
constitute anti-doping rule violations. Hearings in doping cases will proceed
based on the assertion that one or more of these specific rules have been violated.
7
Athletes or other Persons shall be responsible for knowing what constitutes
an anti-doping rule violation and the substances and methods which have
been included on the Prohibited List.
The following constitute anti-doping rule violations:
5 2.1 Presence of a Prohibited Substance or its Metabolites or Markers in
an Athlete’s Sample
2.1.1 It is the Athletes’ personal duty to ensure that no Prohibited
Substance enters their bodies. Athletes are responsible for any
Prohibited Substance or its Metabolites or Markers found to be
10 present in their Samples. Accordingly, it is not necessary that
intent, Fault, Negligence or knowing Use on the Athlete’s part be
demonstrated in order to establish an anti-doping rule
violation under Article 2.1.7
7 [Comment to Article 2.1.1: An anti-doping rule violation is
15 committed under this Article without regard to an Athlete’s Fault. This
rule has been referred to in various CAS decisions as “Strict
Liability”. An Athlete’s Fault is taken into consideration in
determining the Consequences of this anti-doping rule violation under
Article 10. This principle has consistently been upheld by CAS.]
20 2.1.2 Sufficient proof of an anti-doping rule violation under Article 2.1
is established by any of the following: presence of a Prohibited
Substance or its Metabolites or Markers in the Athlete’s A
Sample where the Athlete waives analysis of the B Sample and
the B Sample is not analyzed; or, where the Athlete’s B Sample is
25 analyzed and the analysis of the Athlete’s B Sample confirms the
presence of the Prohibited Substance or its Metabolites or
Markers found in the Athlete’s A Sample; or where the Athlete’s
A or B Sample is split into two parts and the analysis of the
confirmation part of the split Sample confirms the presence of the
30 Prohibited Substance or its Metabolites or Markers found in the
first part of the split Sample or the Athlete waives analysis of the
confirmation part of the split Sample.8
8 [Comment to Article 2.1.2: The Anti-Doping Organization with
Results Management responsibility may, at its discretion, choose
35 to have the B Sample analyzed even if the Athlete does not request
the analysis of the B Sample.]
2.1.3 Excepting those substances for which a Decision Limit is
specifically identified in the Prohibited List or a Technical
Document, the presence of any reported quantity of a Prohibited
40 Substance or its Metabolites or Markers in an Athlete’s Sample
shall constitute an anti-doping rule violation.
2.1.4 As an exception to the general rule of Article 2.1, the Prohibited
List, International Standards, or Technical Documents may
establish special criteria for reporting or the evaluation of certain
45 Prohibited Substances.
2.2 Use or Attempted Use by an Athlete of a Prohibited Substance or a
Prohibited Method 9
9 [Comment to Article 2.2: It has always been the case that Use or
Attempted Use of a Prohibited Substance or Prohibited Method may
be established by any reliable means. As noted in the Comment to
50
Article 3.2, unlike the proof required to establish an anti-doping rule
violation under Article 2.1, Use or Attempted Use may also be
established by other reliable means such as admissions by the Athlete,
8
witness statements, documentary evidence, conclusions drawn from
longitudinal profiling, including data collected as part of the Athlete
Biological Passport, or other analytical information which does not
otherwise satisfy all the requirements to establish “Presence” of a
Prohibited Substance under Article 2.1. For example, Use may be 5
established based upon reliable analytical data from the analysis of an
A Sample (without confirmation from an analysis of a B Sample) or
from the analysis of a B Sample alone where the Anti-Doping
Organization provides a satisfactory explanation for the lack of
confirmation in the other Sample.] 10
2.2.1 It is the Athletes’ personal duty to ensure that no Prohibited
Substance enters their bodies and that no Prohibited Method is
Used. Accordingly, it is not necessary that intent, Fault,
Negligence or knowing Use on the Athlete’s part be demonstrated
in order to establish an anti-doping rule violation for Use of a 15
Prohibited Substance or a Prohibited Method.
2.2.2 The success or failure of the Use or Attempted Use of a
Prohibited Substance or Prohibited Method is not material. It is
sufficient that the Prohibited Substance or Prohibited Method was
Used or Attempted to be Used for an anti-doping rule violation to 20
be committed.10
10 [Comment to Article 2.2.2: Demonstrating the “Attempted Use”
of a Prohibited Substance or a Prohibited Method requires proof of
intent on the Athlete’s part. The fact that intent may be required to
prove this particular anti-doping rule violation does not undermine 25
the Strict Liability principle established for violations of Article 2.1
and violations of Article 2.2 in respect of Use of a Prohibited
Substance or Prohibited Method. An Athlete’s Use of a Prohibited
Substance constitutes an anti-doping rule violation unless such
Substance is not prohibited Out-of-Competition and the Athlete’s 30
Use takes place Out-of-Competition. (However, the presence of a
Prohibited Substance or its Metabolites or Markers in a Sample
collected In-Competition is a violation of Article 2.1 regardless of
when that Substance might have been administered.)]
2.3 Evading, Refusing or Failing to Submit to Sample Collection by an 35
Athlete
Evading Sample collection; or refusing or failing to submit to Sample
collection without compelling justification after notification by a
duly authorized Person.11
11 [Comment to Article 2.3: For example, it would be an anti-doping 40
rule violation of “evading Sample collection” if it were established that
an Athlete was deliberately avoiding a Doping Control official to evade
notification or Testing. A violation of “failing to submit to Sample
collection” may be based on either intentional or negligent conduct of
the Athlete, while “evading” or “refusing” Sample collection 45
contemplates intentional conduct by the Athlete.]
2.4 Whereabouts Failures by an Athlete
Any combination of three missed tests and/or filing failures, as defined
in the International Standard for Results Management, within a
twelve-month period by an Athlete in a Registered Testing Pool. 50
2.5 Tampering or Attempted Tampering with any Part of Doping Control
by an Athlete or Other Person
2.6 Possession of a Prohibited Substance or a Prohibited Method by an
Athlete or Athlete Support Person
9
2.6.1 Possession by an Athlete In-Competition of any Prohibited Substance
or any Prohibited Method, or Possession by an Athlete
Out-of-Competition of any Prohibited Substance or any Prohibited
Method which is prohibited Out-of-Competition unless the Athlete
5 establishes that the Possession is consistent with a Therapeutic Use
Exemption (“TUE”) granted in accordance with Article 4.4 or other
acceptable justification.12
12 [Comment to Articles 2.6.1 and 2.6.2: Acceptable justification
would not include, for example, buying or Possessing a
10 Prohibited Substance for purposes of giving it to a friend or
relative, except under justifiable medical circumstances where
that Person had a physician’s prescription, e.g., buying Insulin
for a diabetic child.]
2.6.2 Possession by an Athlete Support Person In-Competition of any
15 Prohibited Substance or any Prohibited Method, or Possession by
an Athlete Support Person Out-of-Competition of any Prohibited
Substance or any Prohibited Method which is prohibited
Out-of-Competition in connection with an Athlete, Competition
or training, unless the Athlete Support Person establishes that the
20 Possession is consistent with a TUE granted to an Athlete in
accordance with Article 4.4 or other acceptable justification.13
13[Comment to Articles 2.6.1 and 2.6.2: Acceptable justification
may include, for example, (a) an Athlete or a team doctor
carrying Prohibited Substances or Prohibited Methods for
25 dealing with acute and emergency situations (e.g., an epinephrine
auto-injector), or (b) an Athlete Possessing a Prohibited
Substance or Prohibited Method for therapeutic reasons shortly
prior to applying for and receiving a determination on a TUE.]
2.7 Trafficking or Attempted Trafficking in any Prohibited Substance
30 or Prohibited Method by an Athlete or Other Person
2.8 Administration or Attempted Administration by an Athlete or
Other Person to any Athlete In-Competition of any Prohibited
Substance or Prohibited Method, or Administration or Attempted
Administration to any Athlete Out-of-Competition of any
35 Prohibited Substance or any Prohibited Method that is Prohibited
Out-of-Competition
2.9 Complicity or Attempted Complicity by an Athlete or Other Person
Assisting, encouraging, aiding, abetting, conspiring, covering up or any
other type of intentional complicity or Attempted complicity involving
40 an anti-doping rule violation, Attempted anti-doping rule violation or
violation of Article10.14.1 by another Person.14
14 [Comment to Article 2.9: Complicity or Attempted Complicity may
include either physical or psychological assistance.]
2.10 Prohibited Association by an Athlete or Other Person
45 2.10.1 Association by an Athlete or other Person subject to the
authority of an Anti-Doping Organization in a professional or
sport-related capacity with any Athlete Support Person who:
2.10.1.1 If subject to the authority of an Anti-Doping
Organization, is serving a period of Ineligibility; or
50 2.10.1.2 If not subject to the authority of an Anti-Doping
Organization, and where Ineligibility has not been addressed
in a Results Management process pursuant to the Code, has
10
been convicted or found in a criminal, disciplinary or
professional proceeding to have engaged in conduct
which would have constituted a violation of anti-doping
rules if Code-compliant rules had been applicable to such
Person. The disqualifying status of such Person shall be in 5
force for the longer of six (6) years from the criminal,
professional or disciplinary decision or the duration of the
criminal, disciplinary or professional sanction imposed; or
2.10.1.3 Is serving as a front or intermediary for an individual
described in Article 2.10.1.1 or 2.10.1.2. 10
2.10.2 To establish a violation of Article 2.10, an Anti-Doping
Organization must establish that the Athlete or other Person
knew of the Athlete Support Person’s disqualifying status.
The burden shall be on the Athlete or other Person to establish
that any association with an Athlete Support Person described 15
in Article 2.10.1.1 or 2.10.1.2 is not in a professional or
sport-related capacity and/or that such association could not
have been reasonably avoided.
Anti-Doping Organizations that are aware of Athlete Support
Personnel who meet the criteria described in Article 2.10.1.1, 20
2.10.1.2, or 2.10.1.3 shall submit that information to WADA. 15
15 [Comment to Article 2.10: Athletes and other Persons must
not work with coaches, trainers, physicians or other Athlete
Support Personnel who are Ineligible on account of an
anti-doping rule violation or who have been criminally convicted
25
or professionally disciplined in relation to doping. This also
prohibits association with any other Athlete who is acting as a
coach or Athlete Support Person while serving a period of
Ineligibility. Some examples of the types of association which are
prohibited include: obtaining training, strategy, technique, 30
nutrition or medical advice; obtaining therapy, treatment or
prescriptions; providing any bodily products for analysis; or
allowing the Athlete Support Person to serve as an agent or
representative. Prohibited association need not involve any form
35
of compensation.
While Article 2.10 does not require the Anti-Doping
Organization to notify the Athlete or other Person about the
Athlete Support Person’s disqualifying status, such notice, if
provided, would be important evidence to establish that the
Athlete or other Person knew about the disqualifying status of 40
the Athlete Support Person.].
2.11 Acts by an Athlete or Other Person to Discourage or Retaliate
Against Reporting to Authorities
Where such conduct does not otherwise constitute a violation of
Article 2.5: 45
2.11.1 Any act which threatens or seeks to intimidate another Person
with the intent of discouraging the Person from the good-faith
reporting of information that relates to an alleged anti-doping rule
violation or alleged non-compliance with the Code to WADA, an
Anti-Doping Organization, law enforcement, regulatory or 50
professional disciplinary body, hearing body or Person conducting
an investigation for WADA or an Anti-Doping Organization.
2.11.2 Retaliation against a Person who, in good faith, has provided
evidence or information that relates to an alleged anti-doping rule
violation or alleged non-compliance with the Code to WADA, an 55
11
Anti-Doping Organization, law enforcement, regulatory or
professional disciplinary body, hearing body or Person conducting
an investigation for WADA or an Anti-Doping Organization. 16
16 [Comment to Article 2.11.2: This Article is intended to protect
5 Persons who make good faith reports, and does not protect
Persons who knowingly make false reports.]
For purposes of Article 2.11, retaliation, threatening and
intimidation include an act taken against such Person either
because the act lacks a good faith basis or is a disproportionate
10 response.17
17 [Comment to Article 2.11.2: Retaliation would include, for
example, actions that threaten the physical or mental well-being
or economic interests of the reporting Persons, their families or
associates. Retaliation would not include an Anti-Doping
15 Organization asserting in good faith an anti-doping rule violation
against the reporting Person. For purposes of Article 2.11, a
report is not made in good faith where the Person making the
report knows the report to be false.]”.
LOK SABHA
————
A
BILL
to amend the National Anti-Doping Act, 2022.
————
(As passed by Lok Sabha)
