Registered No. WB/SC-247
No. WB(Part-IV)/2026/SAR-8
The
Kolkata Gazette
Extraordinary
Published by Authority
MAGHA 17] FRIDAY, FEBRUARY 6, 2026 [SAKA 1947
PART IV—Bills introduced in the West Bengal Legislative Assembly; Reports of Select Committees
presented or to be presented to that Assembly; and Bills published before introduction in that
Assembly.
GOVERNMENT OF WEST BENGAL
6th February, 2026, under rule 66 of the Rules of
LAW DEPARTMENT Procedure and Conduct of Business in the
Legislative West Bengal Legislative Assembly, the publication of the
NOTIFICATION following Bill, together with the Statement of Objects and
Reasons which accompanies it, in the Kolkata Gazette,
No. 105-L.— 6th February, 2026.—The Governor
the Bill and the Statement of Objects and Reasons are
having been pleased to order, in cancellation of Bill No. 7
of 2026, published vide Notification No. 101-L, dated accordingly hereby published for general information:—
Bill No. 8 of 2026
THE MURSHIDABAD UNIVERSITY (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2026.
(As passed by the Assembly on the 27th February, 2018.)
A
BILL
to amend the Murshidabad University Act, 2018.
WHEREAS it is expedient to amend the Murshidabad University Act, 2018, in order West Ben.
Act XVIII
to rename the Murshidabad University by the name of the Murshidabad Maharaja of 2018.
Krishnath University, Berhampore, and for such other matters connected therewith and
incidental thereto;
It is hereby enacted in the Seventy-seventh Year of the Republic of India, by the
Legislature of West Bengal, as follows:—
2 THE KOLKATA GAZETTE, EXTRAORDINARY, FEBRUARY 6, 2026 [PART IV
The Murshidabad University (Amendment) Bill, 2026.
(Clauses 1–9.)
Short title and
1. (1) This Act may be called the Murshidabad University (Amendment) Act,
commencement.
2026.
(2) It shall come into force at once.
Amendment of 2. In the long title of the Murshidabad University Act, 2018 (hereinafter referred
the long title of
Act XVIII of to as the principal Act), for the words “Murshidabad University”, the words
2018.
“Murshidabad Maharaja Krishnath University, Berhampore” shall be substituted.
Amendment of 3. In the preamble of the principal Act, for the words “Murshidabad University”,
Preamble.
the words “Murshidabad Maharaja Krishnath University, Berhampore” shall be
substituted.
Amendment of 4. In sub-section (1) of section 1 of the principal Act, for the words “Murshidabad
section 1.
University”, the words “Murshidabad Maharaja Krishnath University, Berhampore”
shall be substituted.
Amendment of 5. In clause (28) of section 2 of the principal Act, for the words “Murshidabad
section 2.
University”, the words “Murshidabad Maharaja Krishnath University, Berhampore”
shall be substituted.
Amendment of 6. In section 3 of the principal Act,—
section 3.
(1) in sub-section (1), for the words “Murshidabad University”, the words
“Murshidabad Maharaja Krishnath University, Berhampore” shall be substituted;
(2) in sub-section (2), for the words “Murshidabad University”, the words
“Murshidabad Maharaja Krishnath University, Berhampore” shall be substituted.
Amendment of 7. In clause (a) of sub-section (8) of section 63 of the principal Act, for the words
section 63.
“Murshidabad University”, the words “Murshidabad Maharaja Krishnath University,
Berhampore” shall be substituted.
Amendment of 8. In sub-section (7) of section 64 of the principal Act, for the words “Murshidabad
section 64.
University”, the words “Murshidabad Maharaja Krishnath University, Berhampore”
shall be substituted.
Amendment of 9. In section 65 of the principal Act,—
section 65.
(1) in the marginal note, for the words “Murshidabad University”, the words
“Murshidabad Maharaja Krishnath University, Berhampore” shall be substituted;
(2) in sub-section (1), for the words “Murshidabad University Council”, the words
“Murshidabad Maharaja Krishnath University, Berhampore, Council” shall be
substituted.
PART IV] THE KOLKATA GAZETTE, EXTRAORDINARY, FEBRUARY 6, 2026 3
The Murshidabad University (Amendment) Bill, 2026.
STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS.
The Murshidabad University was established by upgradation of Krishnath College
through the Murshidabad University Act, 2018 (West Ben. Act XVIII of 2018).
Krishnath College, one of the oldest and most respected institutions of higher learning
in West Bengal was established in Berhampore in 1853. Murshidabad is a district
steeped in history, from being the pre-colonial capital of Bengal to a centre of the Bengal
Renaissance. Maharaja Krishnanath was a central figure in this latter period, embodying
the spirit of social reform, education and cultural synthesis. Renaming the university
after him provides a distinct and proud historical identity, differentiating it from other
State universities and rooting it firmly in the correct historical perspective.
2. Considering above, the State Government has decided to rename the Murshidabad
University as “the Murshidabad Maharaja Krishnath University, Berhampore”.
3. The Bill has been framed with the above objects in view.
4. There is no financial implication involved in giving effect to the provisions of
the Bill.
KOLKATA, BRATYA BASU,
The 5th February, 2026. Member-in-charge.
——————
By order of the Governor,
SUBHRADIP MITRA,
Pr. Secy. to the Govt. of West Bengal,
Law Department.
Published by Law Department, Government of West Bengal and
Printed at Saraswaty Press Ltd.(Government of West Bengal Enterprise), Kolkata 700 056.
