AS INTRODUCED IN THE RAJYA SABHA
ON THE 25TH MARCH, 2026
Bill No. XLI of 2026
THE CENTRAL ARMED POLICE FORCES (GENERAL
ADMINISTRATION) BILL, 2026
A
BILL
to regulate the general rules governing the recruitment and conditions of service
of Group A General Duty Officers and other officers in the Central Armed
Police Forces and other rules regarding these forces, and for matters
connected therewith or incidental thereto.
WHEREAS the Central Armed Police Forces are performing important
fu\nctions of national security and are deployed for securing borders and maintaining
internal security of the Union and the States and connected matters;
AND WHEREAS the Central Armed Police Forces are primarily armed troops
performing armed duties in the field with strict command and control mechanism
and a functional hierarchy;
AND WHEREAS the operational and functional requirements of the Central
Armed Police Forces are distinct from other organisations;
2
AND WHEREAS the recruitment and conditions of service of Group A General
Duty Officers and other officers and members of the Central Armed Police Forces
are governed by the rules made under the respective Acts specified in the First
Schedule;
AND WHEREAS the Central Armed Police Forces perform functions of national
security in close coordination with State authorities;
AND WHEREAS in the interest of maintaining Centre-State relationship and
ensuring close coordination between the Union and the States, the Indian Police
Service Officers are necessary for effective functioning of these forces;
AND WHEREAS it is considered necessary to enact an umbrella law to regulate
the recruitment and conditions of service of Group A General Duty Officers and
other officers appointed to the Central Armed Police Forces and other rules
regarding these forces, with a view to ensuring legislative clarity, preserving its
operational distinctiveness, and harmonising judicial directions with administrative
and federal requirements.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Seventy-seventh Year of the Republic of
India as follows:––
Short title and 1. (1) This Act may be called the Central Armed Police Forces (General
commencement. Administration) Act, 2026.
(2) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by 5
notification in the Official Gazette, appoint.
2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,—
Definitions.
(a) “Central Armed Police Force” means an armed force of the Union
constituted under any of the Acts specified in the First Schedule;
(b) “Central Government” means the Ministry of Home Affairs in the 10
Government of India;
(c) “Group A General Duty Officer” means Group A (general duty or
executive) officer of the rank of Assistant Commandant and above in the
Central Armed Police Force;
(d) “notification” means a notification published in the Official 1 5
Gazette and the expression “notify” or “notified” shall be construed
accordingly;
(e) “officer” means Group A General Duty Officer and includes—
(i) an officer of the Indian Police Service on deputation; or
(ii) an officer of the Indian Army on deputation or 2 0
re-employment; or
(iii) such other officers recruited under the rules specified in the
Second Schedule,
in the Central Armed Police Force;
(f) “Order” means any instruction issued by any department of the 25
Government of India whether called as Office Memorandum or by any
other name.
Regulation of 3. (1) Notwithstanding anything contained in any other law for the time being
recruitment and in force, or in—
conditions of
service. (a) any judgment, decree or order of any court; or 30
(b) any Order issued from time to time,
3
the Central Government may, by notification, make rules to provide for the method,
manner and mode of recruitment including promotion and deputation and the
conditions of service of officers in the Central Armed Police Force:
Provided that the rules regulating the recruitment of Group A General Duty
5 Officers as specified in the Second Schedule, shall continue to be in force unless
and until they are modified, amended, rescinded or superseded, keeping in view the
functional and operational requirements of the Central Armed Police Force:
Provided further that for the purposes of appointment of officers from the
Indian Police Service in the ranks of Inspector General and above, such rules shall
10 provide for––
(a) fifty per cent. of the posts to be filled by deputation in the rank of
Inspector General; and
(b) a minimum of sixty-seven per cent. of the posts to be filled by
deputation in the rank of Additional Director General:
15 Provided also that the posts in the ranks of Special Director General and
Director General shall be filled by deputation only.
(2) The Central Government may, by notification, make such other rules for
the Central Armed Police Forces for achieving the objectives of this Act.
(3) In case of any inconsistency between any rule made under this Act with
20 any other rule or Order, whether made or issued before or after the commencement
of this Act, the rules made under this Act shall prevail.
4.(1) The Central Government may, if it is of the opinion that it is necessary Power to amend
or expedient in the public interest so to do, by notification,— Schedules.
(a)add any other Act governing a new armed force of the Union or any
25 existing armed force of the Union in the First Schedule, or alter or amend the
said Schedule; or
(b) add a new rule in the Second Schedule or alter or amend the said
Schedule,
and thereupon, the First Schedule or the Second Schedule shall be deemed to be
30 amended accordingly.
(2) Every notification issued under sub-section (1) shall be laid, as soon as
may be after it is made, before each House of Parliament.
5.Any financial benefits granted to Group A General Duty Officers under any Savings.
Order issued before the date of commencement of this Act shall continue to be so
35 granted till such time new Orders are issued in this regard.
6.(1) The Central Government may, by notification, make rules for carrying Power to make
out the purposes of this Act. rules.
(2)Every rule made under this Act shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is
made, before each House of Parliament, while it is in session for a total period of
40 thirty days which may be comprised in one session or in two or more successive
sessions, and if, before the expiry of the session immediately following the session
or the successive sessions aforesaid, both Houses agree in making any modification
in the rule, or both Houses agree that the rule should not be made, the rule shall
thereafter have effect only in such modified form or be of no effect, as the case may
45 be; so, however, that any such modification or annulment shall be without prejudice
to the validity of anything previously done under that rule.
7. The provisions of this Act shall have effect, notwithstanding anything Provisions of
inconsistent therewith contained in any other law for the time being in force or any Act to have
overriding
instrument having effect by virtue of any such law.
effect.
4
Power to remove 8.(1) If any difficulty arises in giving effect to the provisions of this Act, the
difficulties.
Central Government may, by order published in the Official Gazette, make such
provisions, not inconsistent with the provisions of this Act, as may appear to it to be
necessary or expedient for removing the difficulty:
Provided that no order shall be made under this section after the expiry of three 5
years from the commencement of this Act.
(2)Every order made under this section shall be laid, as soon as may be after
it is made, before each House of Parliament.
5
THE FIRST SCHEDULE
[See sections 2(a) and 4(1)(a)]
Sl. No. Central Armed Police Force Acts
1. The Central Reserve Police Force Act, 1949 (66 of 1949).
2. The Border Security Force Act, 1968 (47 of 1968).
3. The Central Industrial Security Force Act, 1968 (50 of 1968).
4. The Indo-Tibetan Border Police Act, 1992 (35 of 1992).
5. The Sashastra Seema Bal Act, 2007 (53 of 2007).
5
6
THE SECOND SCHEDULE
[See sections 2(e)(iii), 3(1) and 4(1)(b)]
Sl. No. Name of the rules
1. (i) The Central Reserve Police Force Group “A” (General Duty)
Officers Recruitment Rules, 2010.
2. (i) The Border Security Force Group ‘A’ (General Duty Officers)
Recruitment Rules, 2017.
(ii) The Border Security Force Group ‘A’ (General Duty Officers)
Recruitment Rules, 2015.
3. (i) The Central Industrial Security Force, Assistant Commandant
(Executive), Recruitment Rules, 2009.
(ii) The Central Industrial Security Force (Group ‘A’ Executive
Cadre Recruitment Rules, 2002).
(iii) The Central Industrial Security Force, Group ‘A’ posts
(Executive Cadre) Recruitment Rules, 2010.
(iv) The Central Industrial Security Force, Additional Director
General, Recruitment Rules, 2020.
(v) The Central Industrial Security Force, Director General,
Recruitment Rules, 2003.
4. (i) The Indo-Tibetan Border Police Force, General Duty Cadre
(Group ‘A’ Posts) Recruitment Rules, 2018.
(ii) The Indo-Tibetan Border Police Force, Additional Director
General (General Duty) Recruitment Rules, 2020.
5. (i) The Sashastra Seema Bal Group ‘A’ Combatised (General Duty)
Director General, Additional Director General, Inspector General,
Deputy Inspector General and Commandant Posts Recruitment
Rules, 2013.
(ii)The Sashastra Seema Bal Group ‘A’ Combatised (General Duty)
Second-in-Command, Deputy Commandant and Assistant
Commandant Posts Recruitment Rules, 2012.
6
STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
The Central Armed Police Forces play a vital role in maintaining national
security and discharging important functions such as securing the borders of the
country, undertaking anti-insurgency operations and maintaining internal security
of the Union and the States and matters connected therewith. These Forces are also
designed to supplement Armed Forces of the Union during war.
2. The Central Armed Police Forces primarily comprise ground troops who
perform armed duties in the field. Owing to the nature of armed duties performed
by these Forces, they are required to have strict command and control mechanism
and functional hierarchy. Accordingly, they are structured as
Sections/Platoons/Companies/Battalions and higher field formations. Having
regard to the requirement of their operational command structure, the organisational
framework of the Central Armed Police Forces differs from that of other
organisations.
3. Under article 312 of the Constitution, the Indian Police Service is an All
India Service, and the officers of the Service are posted in the Union and the States.
Historically, Indian Police Service officers are an integral and important part of the
Central Armed Police Forces, who have been serving on deputation along with
officers and members of these Forces. The Central Armed Police Forces perform
functions relating to national security and anti-insurgency in close coordination with
the State authorities. Therefore, in the interest of maintaining Centre-State relations
by ensuring close coordination between the Union and the States for effective
operational functioning, it is essential to maintain the existing system of deputation
of the Indian Police Service Officers in the Central Armed Police Forces.
4. The Central Armed Police Forces are governed by the respective Acts of
the Parliament. The recruitment and conditions of service of Group A General Duty
Officers and other officers and members in the Central Armed Police Forces are
governed by the rules made under these Acts.
5.In view of expanding functional and operational requirements, the distinct
organisational structure of these Forces have evolved over a period of time. In recent
years, due to absence of an umbrella law, regulatory provisions have evolved in a
fragmented manner resulting in several litigations on service-related matters,
leading to some functional and administrative difficulties. Considering the nature
and purposes of the Central Armed Police Forces and to avoid unnecessary
litigations, there is a need to lay down an umbrella law to regulate the recruitment,
deputation, promotion and other conditions of services of Group A General Duty
Officers and other officers appointed in these Central Armed Police Forces and other
rules regarding these Forces, to ensure legislative clarity, preserving their distinct
operational and functional requirements and harmonising judicial directions with
administrative and federal requirements.
6.The Bill seeks to achieve the above objectives.
NEW DELHI; AMIT SHAH.
The 16th March, 2026.
7
FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM
The provisions of the proposed legislation do not involve any expenditure,
either recurring or non-recurring, from and out of the Consolidated Fund of India.
78
MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION
Clause 6 of the Bill confers power upon the Central Government to make rules
for carrying out the provisions of the Bill. The matters in respect of which such rules
may be made relate to the method, manner and mode of recruitment including
promotion and deputation and the conditions of service of officers in the Central
Armed Police Force under sub-clause (1) of clause 3 and such other rules for the
Central Armed Police Forces under sub-clause (2) of clause 3.
2. The matters in respect of which the rules may be made are matters of
procedure and administrative detail and it is not practicable to provide for them in
the Bill itself. The delegation of legislative power is, therefore, of a normal
character.
7
9
RAJYA SABHA
————
A
BILL
to regulate the general rules governing the recruitment and conditions of service
of Group A General Duty Officers and other officers in the Central Armed
Police Forces and other rules regarding these forces, and for matters
connected therewith or incidental thereto.
————
(Shri Amit Shah, Minister of Home Affairs and Cooperation)
RS-P&PS-GB(E)–004–20.03.2026.
