AS INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA
Bill No. 85 of 2026
THE CORPORATE LAWS (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2026
A
BILL
further to amend the Limited Liability Partnership Act, 2008 and the Companies
Act, 2013.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Seventy-seventh Year of the Republic of
India as follows:—
CHAPTER I
\ PRELIMINARY
5 1.(1) This Act may be called the Corporate Laws (Amendment) Act, 2026. Short title and
commencement.
(2) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by
notification in the Official Gazette, appoint; and different dates may be appointed
for different provisions of this Act, and any reference in any provision to the
commencement of this Act shall be construed as a reference to the coming into force
of that provision.
2
CHAPTER II
AMENDMENTS TO THE LIMITED LIABILITY PARTNERSHIP ACT, 2008
Amendment of 2. In the Limited Liability Partnership Act, 2008 (hereafter in this Chapter 6 of 2009.
section 2. referred to as the principal Act), in section 2, in sub-section (1),―
(i) after clause (m), the following clauses shall be inserted, namely:— 5
‘(ma) “International Financial Services Centre” shall have the
same meaning as assigned to it in clause (g) of sub-section (1) of
section 3 of the International Financial Services Centres Authority
Act, 2019; 50 of 2019.
(mb) “International Financial Services Centres Authority” means 10
the Authority established under sub-section (1) of section 4 of the
International Financial Services Centres Authority Act, 2019;’; 50 of 2019.
(ii) after clause (q), the following clause shall be inserted, namely:—
‘(qa) “permitted foreign currency” means a currency which may
be specified by the International Financial Services Centres Authority in 15
consultation with the Central Government;’;
(iii) after clause (ta), the following clause shall be inserted, namely:—
‘(tb) “Specified International Financial Services Centre LLP”
means a limited liability partnership which is set up in an International
Financial Services Centre and regulated by the International Financial 20
Services Centres Authority;’.
Amendment of 3. In section 11 of the principal Act,––
section 11.
(a) in sub-section (1), for clause (c), the following clauses shall be
substituted, namely:––
“(c) there shall be filed along with the incorporation document, a 25
statement in such form, as may be prescribed, by any one person who
subscribed his name to the incorporation document that all the
requirements of this Act and the rules made thereunder have been
complied with, in respect of incorporation and matters precedent and
incidental thereto; 30
(d) a declaration in the prescribed form by an advocate, a chartered
accountant, cost accountant or company secretary in practice, where a
limited liability partnership engaged such professionals in its formation
or incorporation.”;
(b) in sub-section (2), in clause (c), the following proviso shall be 35
inserted, namely:––
“Provided that a Specified International Financial Services Centre
LLP shall state its objects to undertake financial services activities, as
permitted under clause (e) of sub-section (1) of section 3 of the
International Financial Services Centres Authority Act, 2019 and any 40 50 of 2019.
matter considered necessary in furtherance thereof, in accordance with
the regulatory requirements specified by the International Financial
Services Centres Authority;”.
Amendment of 4. In section 13 of the principal Act, in sub-section (1), the following proviso
section 13. shall be inserted, namely:–– 45
“Provided that a Specified International Financial Services Centre LLP
shall have its registered office at an International Financial Services Centre, at
all times.”.
3
5. In section 15 of the principal Act, in sub-section (1), the following proviso Am endment of
section 15.
shall be inserted, namely:––
‘Provided that a Specified International Financial Services Centre LLP
shall have the suffix “International Financial Services Centre LLP” as part of
5 its name.’.
6. In section 23 of the principal Act, in sub-section (2), the following proviso Amendment of
shall be inserted, namely:— section 23.
“Provided that in case of a class or classes of limited liability
partnerships regulated by the Securities and Exchange Board of India, or by
10 the International Financial Services Centres Authority, as may be prescribed,
the requirement of filing any changes in the limited liability partnership
agreement shall be such, as may be prescribed.”.
7. In section 25 of the principal Act, in sub-section (2), the following proviso Amendment of
shall be inserted, namely:— section 25.
15 “Provided that in case of a class or classes of limited liability
partnerships regulated by the Securities and Exchange Board of India, or by
the International Financial Services Centres Authority, as may be prescribed,
there shall be a requirement to furnish the details of such changes to the
Registrar on an annual basis, in such form and manner, as may be prescribed.”.
20 8. In section 32 of the principal Act, in sub-section (2), the following provisos Amendment of
shall be inserted, namely:–– section 32.
“Provided that the monetary value of contribution of each partner of a
Specified International Financial Services Centre LLP shall be accounted for
and disclosed in a permitted foreign currency in its accounts:
25 Provided further that a limited liability partnership set up in an
International Financial Services Centre prior to the commencement of the
Corporate Laws (Amendment) Act, 2026 may convert monetary value of
contribution of each of its partners from Indian rupee to a permitted foreign
currency within such period and in such manner, as may be specified by the
30 International Financial Services Centres Authority, in consultation with the
Central Government:
Provided also that a limited liability partnership referred to in the first
proviso shall not be permitted after such commencement, to receive or accept
monetary contribution from any partner, without converting its monetary
35 contribution into a permitted foreign currency.”.
9. After section 33 of the principal Act, the following section shall be inserted, Insertion of new
section 33A.
namely:––
18 of 2013. “33A. The provisions of section 247 of the Companies Act, 2013 shall Provisions of
Companies Act,
mutatis mutandis apply for the valuation, required to be made in respect of
2013 to apply
40 contribution of a partner of a limited liability partnership, or of any property for valuation.
or assets or net worth of such limited liability partnership, or its liabilities
under the provisions of this Act or rules made thereunder.”.
10. In section 34 of the principal Act,–– Amendment of
section 34.
(a) in sub-section (1), the following provisos shall be inserted,
45 namely:—
“Provided that a Specified International Financial Services Centre
LLP, maintaining its contribution in a permitted foreign currency, shall
prepare and maintain its books of account, books and papers, financial
statement and all other records in the permitted foreign currency:
4
Provided further that a Specified International Financial Services
Centre LLP may be permitted to prepare its books of account, books and
papers, financial statement and other records in Indian rupee, if so
allowed by the International Financial Services Centres Authority.”;
(b) in sub-section (5), for the word, brackets and figure 5
“sub-section (3)”, the words, brackets and figures “sub-sections (1), (2) and
(3)” shall be substituted;
(c) in sub-section (6), the words, brackets and figures “sub-section (1),
sub-section (2) and” shall be omitted.
Amendment of 11. In section 38 of the principal Act,–– 10
section 38.
(a) in sub-section (3), the words “or requisition” shall be omitted;
(b) after sub-section (3), the following sub-section shall be inserted,
namely:––
“(4) Any person who, without lawful excuse, fails to comply with
any requisition of the Registrar, other than summons, under this section, 15
shall be liable to a penalty of ten thousand rupees.”.
Insertion of new 12. After section 57 of the principal Act, the following section shall be
section 57A. inserted, namely:—
Conversion from “57A. A specified trust may convert into a limited liability partnership
specified trust
in accordance with the provisions of this Chapter and the Fifth Schedule. 20
into limited
liability
Explanation.––For the purposes of this section, the term “specified trust”
partnership.
means a trust established under the Indian Trusts Act, 1882 or under a Central 2 of 1882.
Act or State Act, and registered by the Securities and Exchange Board of India,
or by the International Financial Services Centres Authority, as the case may
25
be, having such activities as may be prescribed.”.
Substitution of 13. For section 58 of the principal Act, the following section shall be
new section for substituted, namely:—
section 58.
Registration and “58. (1) The Registrar, on satisfying that a firm, private company,
effect of unlisted public company or a specified trust, as the case may be, has complied
conversion.
with the provisions of the Second Schedule, the Third Schedule, the Fourth 30
Schedule or the Fifth Schedule, as the case may be, shall, subject to the
provisions of this Act and the rules made thereunder, register the documents
submitted under such Schedule and issue a certificate of registration in such
form, as the Registrar may determine, stating that the limited liability
partnership is, on and from the date specified in the certificate, registered 35
under this Act:
Provided that the limited liability partnership shall, within fifteen days
of the date of registration, inform the concerned Registrar of Firms or
Registrar of Companies or any other authority, as the case may be, with which
it was registered or established under the provisions of the Indian Partnership 40
Act, 1932 or the Companies Act, 2013, or any other law for the time being in 9 of 1932.
force, as the case may be, about the conversion and of the particulars of the 18 of 2013.
limited liability partnership in such form and manner as may be prescribed.
(2) Upon such conversion, the partners of the firm, the shareholders of
private company or unlisted public company, or the trustees of the specified 45
trust, as the case may be, the limited liability partnership to which such firm
or such company or such specified trust has converted, and the partners of the
limited liability partnership, shall be bound by the provisions of the Second
Schedule, the Third Schedule, the Fourth Schedule or the Fifth Schedule, as
the case may be, applicable to them. 50
5
(3) Upon such conversion, on and from the date of certificate of registration,
the effects of the conversion shall be such as specified in the Second Schedule, the
Third Schedule, the Fourth Schedule or the Fifth Schedule, as the case may be.
(4) Notwithstanding anything contained in any other law for the time
5 being in force, on and from the date of registration specified in the certificate
of registration issued under the Second Schedule, the Third Schedule, the
Fourth Schedule or the Fifth Schedule, as the case may be,—
(a) there shall be a limited liability partnership by the name
specified in the certificate of registration registered under this Act;
10 (b) all tangible (movable or immovable) and intangible property
vested in the firm, the company or the specified trust, as the case may
be, all assets, interests, rights, privileges, liabilities, obligations relating
to the firm, the company or the specified trust, as the case may be, and
the whole of the undertaking of firm, the company or the specified trust,
as the case may be, shall be transferred to and shall vest in the limited
15
liability partnership without further assurance, act or deed; and
(c) the firm, the company or the specified trust, as the case may be,
shall be deemed to be dissolved and removed from the records of the
Registrar of Firms or Registrar of Companies or such other authority, as
20 the case may be.”.
14. In section 68 of the principal Act, in sub-section (1), the following provisos
Amendment of
shall be inserted, namely:–– section 68.
“Provided that the Central Government may require that a Specified
International Financial Services Centre LLP shall use permitted foreign
25 currency for the purpose of filing, recording or registering any document under
this section in such manner as may be prescribed:
Provided further that such Specified International Financial Services
Centre LLP shall pay fees, fines and penalties as provided in the relevant
provisions of this Act and the rules made thereunder in Indian rupees.”.
30 15. After section 68A of the principal Act, the following section shall be Insertion of new
inserted, namely:–– section 68B.
“68B. Any person aggrieved by the decision of the Registrar under section Appeal against
12 or section 16, may prefer an appeal to such officer of the Central Government, decision of
Registrar.
in such form and manner, and within such period, as may be prescribed.”.
35 16. In section 76A of the principal Act,— Amendment of
section 76A.
(a) after sub-section (1), the following sub-section shall be inserted,
namely:—
“(1A) A limited liability partnership or its partner or designated
partner may make an application in such form and manner and on
40
payment of such fees, as may be prescribed, under this section for
adjudication of penalty.”;
(b) after sub-section (9), the following sub-section shall be inserted,
namely:—
“(10) On and from the commencement of the Corporate Laws
45 (Amendment) Act, 2026, where a provision in respect of any offence
provided in this Act has been amended to provide for adjudication under
this section,—
(a) the manner of withdrawal of the complaint; and
(b) the manner of transfer of such matter for adjudication
50 under this section,
6
in respect of such offence, whether pending in the Court or otherwise,
shall be dealt with in accordance with such Scheme as the Central
Government may notify in this behalf.”.
Insertion of new 17. After the Fourth Schedule to the principal Act, the following Schedule
Fifth Schedule.
shall be inserted, namely:— 5
‘THE FIFTH SCHEDULE
(See section 57A)
CONVERSION FROM SPECIFIED TRUST INTO LIMITED LIABILITY PARTNERSHIP
1. Interpretation.—In this Schedule, unless the context otherwise requires,—
(a) “convert”, in relation to a specified trust converting into a limited 10
liability partnership, means a transfer of the property, assets, interests, rights,
privileges, liabilities, obligations and the undertaking of the specified trust
to the limited liability partnership in accordance with this Schedule;
(b) “investor” means an investor to the funds of the specified trust
in accordance with the relevant regulations made by the Securities and 15
Exchange Board of India, or by the International Financial Services
Centres Authority, as the case may be; and
(c) “specified trust” shall have the meaning assigned to it in the
Explanation to section 57A.
2. Conversion from specified trust into limited liability partnership.— 20
(1) A specified trust may convert into a limited liability partnership by
complying with the requirements as to the conversion set out in this Schedule.
(2) Upon such conversion, the trustees of the specified trust shall be
bound by the provisions of this Schedule that are applicable to them.
3. Eligibility for conversion.—A specified trust may apply to convert 25
into a limited liability partnership in accordance with this Schedule, only if the
partners of the limited liability partnership into which the specified trust is to
be converted, are trustees of such specified trust and no one else.
4. Statements to be filed.—A specified trust may apply to convert into a
limited liability partnership by filing with the Registrar,— 30
(a) a statement by all of its trustees in such form and manner and
accompanied by such fee, as may be prescribed, containing the
following particulars, namely:—
(i) the name and registration number, if applicable, of the
specified trust; 35
(ii) the date on which the specified trust was established
under the Indian Trusts Act, 1882 (2 of 1882) or under a Central
Act or State Act;
(iii) the date on which the specified trust was registered with
the Securities and Exchange Board of India, or by the International 40
Financial Services Centres Authority, as the case may be, in terms
of the relevant regulations issued in this regard; and
(iv) the consent of three-fourths of the investors of the trust; and
(b) the incorporation document and statement referred to in section 11.
5. Registration of conversion.—On receiving the documents referred to 45
in paragraph 4, the Registrar shall, subject to the provisions of this Act, register
the documents and issue a certificate of registration in such form, as the
Registrar may determine, stating that the limited liability partnership is, on
and from the date specified in the certificate, registered under this Act:
7
Provided that the limited liability partnership shall, within fifteen days
of the date of registration, inform, the concerned authority with which
specified trust was established under the provisions of the Indian Trusts
Act, 1882 (2 of 1882) or under a Central Act or State Act, about the conversion
5 and of the particulars of the limited liability partnership in such form and
manner, as may be prescribed.
6. Registrar may refuse to register.—(1) Nothing in this Schedule shall
be construed as to require the Registrar to register any limited liability
partnership, if he is not satisfied with the particulars or other information
10 furnished under the provisions of this Act:
Provided that an appeal may be made before the Tribunal in case of
refusal of registration by the Registrar.
(2) The Registrar may, in any particular case, require the documents
referred to in paragraph 4 to be verified in such manner, as he considers fit.
15 7. Effect of registration.—On and from the date of registration specified
in the certificate of registration issued under paragraph 5,—
(a) there shall be a limited liability partnership by the name
specified in the certificate of registration registered under this Act;
(b) all tangible (movable and immovable) property as well as
20 intangible property vested in the specified trust, all assets, interests,
rights, privileges, liabilities, obligations relating to the specified trust
and the whole of the undertaking of the specified trust shall be
transferred to and shall vest in the limited liability partnership without
further assurance, act or deed; and
25 (c) the specified trust shall be deemed to be dissolved.
8. Registration in relation to property.—If any property to which
sub-paragraph (b) of paragraph 7 applies is registered with any authority, the
limited liability partnership shall, as soon as practicable after the date of
registration, take all necessary steps as required by the relevant authority to
30 notify the authority of the conversion and of the particulars of the limited
liability partnership in such medium and form, as the authority may specify.
9. Pending proceedings.—All proceedings by or against the specified trust
or its trustee, on behalf of the specified trust, which are pending in any Court or
Tribunal or before any authority on the date of registration may be continued,
35 completed and enforced by or against the limited liability partnership.
10. Continuance of conviction, ruling, order or judgment.—Any
conviction, ruling, order or judgment of any Court, Tribunal, or other authority,
in favour of or against the specified trust, or its trustees, acting on behalf of the
specified trust may be enforced by or against the limited liability partnership.
40 11. Existing agreements.—Every agreement, to which the specified trust
was a party immediately before the date of registration, whether or not of such
nature that the rights and liabilities thereunder could be assigned, shall have
effect as from that date, as if—
(a) the limited liability partnership were a party to such an
45 agreement instead of the specified trust; and
(b) for any reference to the specified trust, there were substituted
in respect of anything to be done on or after the date of registration a
reference to the limited liability partnership.
8
12. Existing contracts, etc.—All deeds, contracts, schemes, bonds,
agreements, applications, instruments and arrangements, subsisting
immediately before the date of registration relating to the specified trust or to
which the specified trust is a party, shall continue in force on and after that date
as if they relate to the limited liability partnership and shall be enforceable by or 5
against the limited liability partnership, as if the limited liability partnership
were named therein or were a party thereto instead of the specified trust.
13. Continuance of employment.—Every contract of employment to
which paragraph 11 or paragraph 12 applies, shall continue to be in force on
or after the date of registration, as if the limited liability partnership were the 10
employer thereunder instead of the specified trust.
14. Existing appointment, authority or power.—(1) Every appointment
of the specified trust or its trustee in any role or capacity, which is in force
immediately before the date of registration, shall take effect and operate from
that date as if the limited liability partnership were appointed. 15
(2) Any authority or power conferred on the specified trust or its trustee,
which is in force immediately before the date of registration, shall take effect and
operate from that date as if it were conferred on the limited liability partnership.
15. Application of paragraphs 7 to 14.—The provisions of paragraphs 7
to 14 (both inclusive) shall apply to any approval, permit or licence issued to 20
the specified trust under any other Act, which is in force immediately before
the date of registration of the limited liability partnership, subject to the
provisions of such other Act under which such approval, permit or licence has
been issued.
16. Partner liable for liabilities and obligations of specified trust before
25
conversion.—(1) Notwithstanding anything in paragraphs 7 to 14, every
trustee of a specified trust that has converted into a limited liability
partnership, shall continue to be personally liable (jointly and severally with
the limited liability partnership) for the liabilities and obligations of the
specified trust which were incurred prior to the conversion or which arose 30
from any contract entered into prior to the conversion.
(2) If any such trustee discharges any liability or obligation referred to
in sub-paragraph (1), he shall be entitled (subject to any agreement with the
limited liability partnership to the contrary) to be fully indemnified by the
limited liability partnership in respect of such liability or obligation. 35
17. Notice of conversion in correspondence.—(1) The limited liability
partnership shall ensure that for a period of twelve months commencing not later
than fourteen days after the date of registration, every official correspondence of
the limited liability partnership bears the following, namely:––
(a) a statement that it was, as from the date of registration, 40
converted from a specified trust into a limited liability partnership; and
(b) the name and registration number, if applicable, of the specified
trust, from which it was converted.
(2) Any limited liability partnership which contravenes the provisions of
sub-paragraph (1) shall be punishable with fine which shall not be less than ten
45
thousand rupees but which may extend to one lakh rupees and with a further fine
which shall not be less than fifty rupees but which may extend to five hundred
rupees for every day after the first day after which the default continues.’.
CHAPTER III
AMENDMENTS TO THE COMPANIES ACT, 2013 50
Amendment of 18. In the Companies Act, 2013 (hereafter in this Chapter referred to as the 18 of 2013.
section 2.
principal Act), in section 2,—
9
(i) in clause (28), for the words “the Cost and Works Accountants”, the
words “the Cost Accountants” shall be substituted;
(ii) in clause (41), after the third proviso, the following proviso shall be
inserted, namely:—
5 “Provided also that the Central Government may, on an application
made in such form and manner as may be prescribed, by a company or
body corporate referred to in the first proviso or, on commercial
considerations, by any other company or body corporate, allow the
company or body corporate to realign its financial year as the period
10 ending on the 31st day of March of the following year;”;
(iii) after clause (73), the following clause shall be inserted, namely:—
‘(73A) “Regional Director” means a person appointed by the
Central Government as a Regional Director for the purposes of this Act
and includes an Additional Regional Director or a Joint Regional
15 Director or a Deputy Regional Director under section 396;’;
(iv) after clause (74), the following clause shall be inserted, namely:––
‘(74A) “registered valuer” means a person who holds a certificate
of registration granted under section 247;’;
(v) in clause (85),––
20 (a) in sub-clause (i), for the words “ten crore rupees”, the words
“twenty crore rupees” shall be substituted;
(b) in sub-clause (ii), for the words “one hundred crore rupees”,
the words “two hundred crore rupees” shall be substituted.
19. In section 4 of the principal Act, in sub-section (5), in clause (ii), in Amendment of
25 sub-clause (a), for the words “which may extend to one lakh rupees”, the words section 4.
“of fifty thousand rupees” shall be substituted.
20. In section 7 of the principal Act, in sub-section (1), for clause (b), the Amendment of
following clauses shall be substituted, namely:–– section 7.
“(b) a declaration in the prescribed form by a person named in the articles
30 as a director, manager or secretary of the company, that all the requirements of
this Act and the rules made thereunder in respect of registration and matters
precedent or incidental thereto have been complied with;
(ba) a declaration in the prescribed form by an advocate, a chartered
accountant, cost accountant or company secretary in practice, where a
35 company engaged such professionals in its formation or incorporation;”.
21. After section 12 of the principal Act, the following section shall be Insertion of new
inserted, namely:— section 12A.
“12A. (1) The class or classes of companies, as may be prescribed, shall Certain class or
classes of
maintain a website, an e-mail address and other modes of communication in
companies to
40 such form and manner, as may be prescribed. maintain modes
of
(2) The details of website, e-mail address and other modes of communication communication
referred to in sub-section (1) and the changes, if any, therein, shall be intimated to and provide
the Registrar in such form and within such period, as may be prescribed.”.
particulars.
22. In section 20 of the principal Act, in sub-section (2), for the proviso, the Amendment of
45 following provisos shall be substituted, namely:— section 20.
“Provided that the service of such class of documents by such class or
classes of companies, as may be prescribed, to its members, shall take place only
through electronic mode, in such manner as may be prescribed, and such service
shall be deemed to be sufficient compliance for the purposes of this Act:
10
Provided further that a member may request for delivery of any
document through a particular mode, for which he shall pay such fee as may
be determined by the company in its general meeting.”.
Amendment of 23. In section 24 of the principal Act, in sub-section (2), the words, brackets
section 24. and figures “and the matters delegated to it under proviso to sub-section (1) of 5
section 458” shall be omitted.
Amendment of 24. In section 26 of the principal Act, for sub-section (9), the following
section 26. sub-section shall be substituted, namely:––
“(9) If a prospectus is issued in contravention of the provisions of this
section, the company and every person who is knowingly a party to the issue 10
of such prospectus shall be liable to a penalty of two lakh rupees.”.
Amendment of 25. In section 40 of the principal Act,—
section 40.
(a) in sub-section (5), for the words “this section”, the word, brackets
and figure “sub-section (3)” shall be substituted;
(b) after sub-section (5), the following sub-section shall be inserted, 15
namely:—
“(5A) If a default is made in complying with the provisions of this
section, other than sub-section (3), the company shall be liable to a
penalty of twenty-five lakh rupees and every officer of the company who
is in default shall be liable to a penalty of two lakh rupees.”. 20
Amendment of 26. In section 42 of the principal Act,––
section 42.
(a) in the marginal heading, for the word “shares”, the word “securities”
shall be substituted;
(b) in sub-section (2), after the words “employees stock option”, the
words “or such other scheme linked to the value of the share capital of a 25
company,” shall be inserted;
(c) in sub-section (10), for the words “which may extend to”, the words
“equivalent to” shall be substituted.
Insertion of new 27. After section 43 of the principal Act, the following section shall be
section 43A.
inserted, namely:— 30
Share capital of ‘43A. (1) A company, set up and incorporated in the International
company under
Financial Services Centre, shall issue and maintain its share capital in a
International
Financial permitted foreign currency:
Services Centre.
Provided that a company set up and incorporated in the International
Financial Services Centre prior to the commencement of the Corporate Laws 35
(Amendment) Act, 2026 may convert its share capital from Indian rupee to a
permitted foreign currency within such period and in such manner, as may be
specified by regulations by the International Financial Services Centres
Authority, in consultation with the Central Government:
Provided further that a company referred to in the first proviso shall not 40
be permitted, after the commencement of the Corporate Laws (Amendment)
Act, 2026, to issue any share capital without converting its share capital into
a permitted foreign currency.
(2) A company referred to in sub-section (1), maintaining its share
capital in a permitted foreign currency shall prepare and maintain its books of
45
account, and other relevant books and papers, financial statements and all
other records in the permitted foreign currency:
Provided that if the International Financial Services Centres Authority
permits, such company may present such books of account and other relevant
books and papers, financial statements and other records in Indian rupee. 50
11
(3) The Central Government may, in such manner as may be prescribed,
require that a company referred to in sub-section (1) shall use permitted
foreign currency for the purpose of filing, submitting or delivering any
documents under section 398.
5 (4) Every company referred to in sub-section (1) shall pay fees, fines and
penalties under this Act and the rules made thereunder in Indian rupees.
(5) In this section, the expressions—
(a) “International Financial Services Centre” shall have the same
meaning as assigned to it under clause (g) of sub-section (1) of
10 section 3 of the International Financial Services Centres Authority
50 of 2019. Act, 2019;
(b) “International Financial Services Centres Authority” shall have
the same meaning as assigned to it under clause (b) of sub-section (1) of
section 3 of the International Financial Services Centres Authority
50 of 2019. 15 Act, 2019; and
(c) “permitted foreign currency” means a currency which may be
specified by the International Financial Services Centres Authority in
consultation with the Central Government.’.
28. In section 62 of the principal Act, in sub-section (1), in clause (b), after the Amendment of
20 words “under a scheme of employees’ stock option”, the words “or under such other section 62.
scheme linked to the value of the share capital of the company” shall be inserted.
29. In section 68 of the principal Act,— Amendment of
section 68.
(a) in sub-section (2),––
(i) in clause (c), for the proviso, the following provisos shall be
25 substituted, namely:––
“Provided that in case of such class or classes of companies, as
may be prescribed, the buy-back may be up to such per cent. of
aggregate of paid-up capital and free reserves, as may be prescribed:
Provided further that in respect of the buy-back of equity
30 shares in any financial year, the reference to twenty-five per cent.
or such other per cent., as the case may be, in this clause shall be
construed with respect to its total paid-up equity capital in that
financial year;”;
(ii) in clause (g), after the existing proviso, the following proviso
35 shall be inserted, namely:––
“Provided further that such class or classes of
companies, as may be prescribed, may make up to two offers of
buy-backs within a period of one year reckoned from the date of
the closure of the preceding offer of buy-back, if any, if the
40 second buy-back during the year is not made earlier than six
months from the date of closure of the preceding offer for
buy-back during the year.”;
(b) in sub-section (5), in clause (c), after the words “sweat equity”, the
words, brackets, letter and figures “, or a scheme linked to the value of the
45 share capital of a company referred to in clause (b) of sub-section (1) of
section 62” shall be inserted;
(c) in sub-section (6), the words “and verified by an affidavit” shall be
omitted;
12
(d) in sub-section (8), after the words “sweat equity”, the words,
brackets, letter and figures “, or a scheme linked to the value of the share
capital of a company referred to in clause (b) of sub-section (1) of section 62,”
shall be inserted;
5
(e) in sub-section (11),––
(i) for the words “the company shall be punishable with fine which
shall not be less than one lakh rupees but which may extend to three lakh
rupees”, the words “it shall be liable to a penalty of twenty-five lakh
rupees if it is a listed company and two lakh rupees in case it is any other
company” shall be substituted; 10
(ii) for the words “who is in default shall be punishable with fine
which shall not be less than one lakh rupees but which may extend to
three lakh rupees”, the words, brackets and letters––
“who is in default shall––
(a) be liable to a penalty of five lakh rupees in case of 15
a listed company; and
(b) be liable to a penalty of two lakh rupees in case of
any other company”
shall be substituted;
(f) in Explanation I, after the words “employees’ stock option”, the 20
words, brackets, letter and figures “, or any option under a scheme linked to
the value of the share capital of a company referred to in clause (b) of
sub-section (1) of section 62,” shall be inserted.
Amendment of 30. In section 77 of the principal Act, in sub-section (1), after the second
section 77. proviso, the following proviso shall be inserted, namely:–– 25
‘Provided also that for such class or classes of companies, as may be
prescribed, the period of “sixty days” referred to in clause (b) of the second
proviso shall be read as “one hundred and twenty days”:’.
31. In section 88 of the principal Act, after sub-section (2), the following
Amendment of
section 88. sub-section shall be inserted, namely:— 30
“(2A) No notice of any trust, whether express, implied or constructive,
shall be entered in the register of members or debenture holders maintained
under sub-section (1).”.
32. In section 96 of the principal Act, after sub-section (2), the following
Amendment of
section 96. sub-section shall be inserted, namely:— 35
“(3) A company may hold its annual general meeting physically, or
through video conferencing or other audio-visual means, either wholly or
partly, in such manner and subject to such terms and conditions, as may
be prescribed:
Provided that if the number of members referred to in sub-section (2) of 40
section 100 requisition the meeting to be held in a hybrid mode, the company
shall hold the meeting in such mode:
Provided further that every company shall hold its annual general
meeting in physical mode at least once in every three years.”.
33. In section 99 of the principal Act,—
Amendment of 45
section 99.
(a) in the marginal heading, for the words and figures “Punishment for
default in complying with provisions of sections 96 to 98”, the words and
figures “Penalty for default in complying with provisions of section 96” shall
be substituted;
13
(b) the words and figures “or section 97 or section 98 or in complying
with any directions of the Tribunal” shall be omitted;
(c) for the words “punishable with fine which may extend to one lakh
rupees and in the case of a continuing default, with a further fine which may
5 extend to five thousand rupees for every day during which such default
continues”, the words “liable to a penalty of one lakh rupees and in case of
continuing default, with a further penalty of five thousand rupees for each day
during which such default continues, subject to a maximum of two lakh rupees
in case of a company and fifty thousand rupees in case of an officer who is in
10 default” shall be substituted.
34. In section 100 of the principal Act, after sub-section (6), the following Amendment of
sub-section shall be inserted, namely:— section 100.
“(7) A company may hold its extraordinary general meeting physically, or
through video conferencing or other audio-visual means, either wholly or partly,
15 in such manner and subject to such terms and conditions, as may be prescribed:
Provided that if the number of members referred to in sub-section (2)
requisition the meeting to be held in a hybrid mode, the company shall hold
the meeting in such mode.”.
35. In section 101 of the principal Act, in sub-section (1),— Amendment of
section 101.
20 (a) in the proviso, for the words “Provided that”, the following words
shall be substituted, namely:—
“Provided that the extraordinary general meetings conducted
wholly through video conferencing or audio-visual means under
sub-section (7) of section 100, may be called by giving a notice of not
25 less than seven days, or such other period, and in such manner, as may
be prescribed:
Provided further that”;
(b) in the second proviso, for the words “Provided further”, the words
“Provided also” shall be substituted.
30 36. In section 124 of the principal Act,–– Amendment of
section 124.
(a) in sub-section (5), after the words “seven years from the date of such
transfer”, the words, brackets and figure “, along with any dividend which has
not been paid or claimed where such shares have been transferred by the
company under sub-section (6),” shall be inserted;
35 (b) in sub-section (6),––
(i) after the word “Fund”, the word “Authority” shall be inserted;
(ii) in the proviso, after the word “Fund”, the word “Authority”
shall be inserted;
(iii) in the Explanation, after the word “Fund”, the word
40 “Authority” shall be inserted.
Amendment of
37. In section 125 of the principal Act,—
section 125.
(a) in sub-section (2),––
(i) in clause (m), the word “and” occurring at the end shall be
omitted;
45 (ii) after clause (m), the following clause shall be inserted,
namely:—
“(ma) the amount in respect of shares bought back and
extinguished, remaining unpaid or unclaimed for seven or more
years; and”;
14
(b) in sub-section (3), for clause (a), the following clause shall be
substituted, namely:—
“(a) the refund in respect of unclaimed dividends and amounts
referred to in clauses (h) to (n) of sub-section (2), which is due for refund;”;
(c) in sub-section (4), for the words, brackets and figure “may apply to 5
the authority constituted under sub-section (5)”, the words “may apply, in
accordance with such procedure and on submission of such documents, as may
be prescribed” shall be substituted;
(d) after sub-section (11), the following sub-section shall be inserted,
namely:— 10
“(12) The authority may, by notification, delegate to any member,
officer or any other person subject to such conditions, if any, as may be
specified in such notification, any of its powers and functions under this
Act as it deems necessary.”.
Amendment of 38. In section 128 of the principal Act, in sub-section (6),— 15
section 128.
(a) for the words “be punishable with fine which shall not be less than
fifty thousand rupees but which may extend to five lakh rupees”, the words
“be liable to a penalty of five lakh rupees in case of a listed company and fifty
thousand rupees in case of any other company” shall be substituted;
(b) the following proviso shall be inserted, namely:— 20
“Provided that where the contravention relates to sub-section (1)
or sub-section (5), the person referred to in this sub-section shall be
liable to a penalty of twenty lakh rupees in case of a listed company and
five lakh rupees in case of any other company.”.
Amendment of 39. In section 131 of the principal Act, in sub-section (1), in the long line, for 25
section 131. the words “three preceding financial years”, the words “three immediately
preceding financial years” shall be substituted.
Amendment of 40. In section 132 of the principal Act,—
section 132.
(a) for sub-section (1A), the following sub-section shall be substituted,
namely:— 30
“(1A) The National Financial Reporting Authority shall be a body
corporate by the name aforesaid, having perpetual succession and a
common seal, with power, subject to the provisions of this Act, to
acquire, hold and dispose of property, both movable and immovable, and
to contract, and shall, by the said name, sue or be sued.”; 35
(b) in sub-section (2), in clause (a), after the words “class of companies”,
the words “or bodies corporate” shall be inserted;
(c) sub-section (3A) shall be omitted;
(d) after sub-section (3B), the following sub-sections shall be inserted,
40
namely:—
“(3C) Save as otherwise provided, the Chairperson shall have the
powers of general superintendence and direction of the affairs of the
National Financial Reporting Authority and may exercise all powers and
do all acts and things as may be delegated to him by the executive body.
(3D) The executive body may, by general or special order in 45
writing, delegate to the Chairperson or any full-time Member or officer
of the National Financial Reporting Authority, or to a Committee
comprising of one or more of the above, subject to such conditions, if
any, as may be specified in the order, such powers of the executive body
under this Act as may be deemed necessary.”; 50
15
(e) in sub-section (4),—
(i) in clause (a), for the words “in such manner as may be
prescribed”, the words “, as may be prescribed, and in such manner as
may be specified by regulations by the said Authority” shall be
5 substituted;
(ii) in clause (c),—
(I) in the opening portion, after the words “have the power to
make order for”, the words “one or more of the following,
namely:—” shall be inserted;
10 (II) after sub-clause (B), the following sub-clauses shall be
inserted, namely:—
“(C) issuing an advisory, censure or warning to the
member or the firm;
(D) requiring additional professional training of the
15 member or individual partners or employees of the firm;
(E) referring the matter to the Central Government for
taking action under the provisions of this Act or rules made
thereunder.”;
(iii) for the Explanation, the following Explanation shall be
20 substituted, namely:—
‘Explanation.—For the purposes of this sub-section, the
expression “professional or other misconduct” shall include the
meaning assigned to it under section 22 of the Chartered
38 of 1949. Accountants Act, 1949, and shall further include such acts or
25 omissions which constitute a contravention of the provisions of
this Act, or the rules or regulations made thereunder, in so far as
such provisions relate to matters within the jurisdiction, functions,
or regulatory remit of the National Financial Reporting
Authority.’;
30 (f) after sub-section (4), the following sub-section shall be inserted,
namely:—
“(4A) Any person who fails to comply with any order of the
National Financial Reporting Authority under sub-section (4), or who
fails to pay the penalty imposed under clause (c) of the said sub-section,
35 within a period of ninety days from the date of receipt of the order, or
within such other period as stated in the order, shall,—
(a) where the person against whom penalty has been
imposed, fails to pay the penalty, without prejudice to the penalty
that such person is liable to pay, be punishable—
40 (i) with imprisonment which may extend to six months
or with fine which shall not be less than one lakh rupees but
which may extend to five lakh rupees, if such person is an
individual; or
(ii) with fine which shall not be less than five lakh
rupees but which may extend to twenty-five lakh rupees, if
45
such person is a firm; and
(b) be liable for debarment under sub-clause (B) of clause (c)
of sub-section (4) for such further period as the National Financial
Reporting Authority may consider appropriate.”;
16
(g) in sub-section (10), for the word “prescribed”, the words “specified
by regulations by the said Authority” shall be substituted;
(h) in sub-section (11),––
(i) for the words “The Central Government”, the words “The
National Financial Reporting Authority” shall be substituted; 5
(ii) for the words “of functions by the National Financial Reporting
Authority under this Act and the”, the words “of its functions under this
Act and the salary, allowances and other” shall be substituted;
(iii) for the word “prescribed”, the words “specified by regulations
by the said Authority” shall be substituted; 10
(i) after sub-section (15), the following sub-sections shall be inserted,
namely:—
“(16) No act or proceeding of the National Financial Reporting
Authority shall be invalid merely by the reason of—
(a) any vacancy in, or any defect in the constitution of such 15
Authority; or
(b) any defect in the appointment of a person acting as a
member of such Authority; or
(c) any irregularity in the procedure of such Authority not
affecting the merits of the case. 20
(17) The National Financial Reporting Authority may, in such manner
as may be specified by regulations, engage such number of experts and
professionals who have special knowledge of, and experience in, accounting
standards, auditing standards, economics, law, business or such other
disciplines related to its functions, as it deems necessary to assist the said 25
Authority in the discharge of its functions under this Act.”.
Insertion of new 41. After section 132 of the principal Act, the following sections shall be
sections 132A, inserted, namely:—
132B, 132C,
132D, 132E,
132F, 132G,
132H, 132-I,
132J and 132K.
Intimation of “132A. (1) With effect from such date as the Central Government may,
registration by notification, specify in this behalf, no individual or firm shall be appointed 30
details of
as auditor under section 139 in respect of companies or class of companies or
auditors and
filing of returns. bodies corporate referred to in clause (a) of sub-section (4) of section 132,
unless the individual or firm intimates the details of his or its registration with
the Institute of Chartered Accountants of India, to the National Financial
Reporting Authority within such time, in such manner and along with such 35
fees, as may be prescribed.
(2) The auditors of companies or class of companies or bodies corporate
referred to in sub-section (1), shall file such documents or returns or
information with the National Financial Reporting Authority, in such form and
manner, within such period, and on payment of such fees, as may be specified 40
by regulations by the said Authority.
(3) A person, required to furnish any document or return or any other
information under sub-section (2), who fails to furnish any document or return
or any other information, shall be liable to penalty of not less than twenty-five
thousand rupees, but which may extend to five hundred rupees for each day 45
during which such default continues, subject to a maximum of twenty-five
lakh rupees, if such person is an auditor or an audit firm.
17
(4) If any person, while fulfilling his obligations under this section,—
(a) makes a statement or furnishes any document or return or any
other information which he knows or has reason to believe to be false in
any material particular; or
5 (b) omits to state any material facts or particulars knowing them to
be material; or
(c) wilfully alters, suppresses or destroys any document, return or
information, which is required to be furnished,
then, without prejudice to any other action which may be taken under any law
10 for the time being in force, such person shall be liable to a penalty of not less
than fifty thousand rupees, but which may extend to one thousand rupees for
each day during which such default continues, subject to a maximum of fifty
lakh rupees, if such person is an auditor or an audit firm.
132B. (1) The Central Government may, after due appropriation made Fund of
15 by Parliament by law in this behalf, make to the National Financial Reporting Authority.
Authority, grants of such sums of money as the Central Government may think
fit for being utilised for the purposes of this Act.
(2) There shall be constituted a Fund, to be called the National Financial
Reporting Authority Fund, wherein the following shall be credited, namely:—
20 (a) grants made by the Central Government for the purposes of the
National Financial Reporting Authority Fund;
(b) all fees received by the said Authority under this Act;
(c) all sums received by the said Authority from such other sources
as may be decided by the Central Government; and
25 (d) interest or other income received out of the investments made
from the National Financial Reporting Authority Fund.
(3) The Fund shall be applied for meeting the expenses of the National
Financial Reporting Authority for the discharge of its functions and for the
purposes of this Act and for such other purposes, as may be prescribed.
30 132C. (1) In exercise of its functions under this Act, where the National Power of
Authority to
Financial Reporting Authority is satisfied that it is necessary in public interest
issue directions.
or the interest of investors or creditors or other persons concerned, it may give
such directions to auditors of companies, class of companies or bodies
corporate referred to in clause (a) of sub-section (4) of section 132, as it may
35 consider appropriate.
(2) Whoever fails to comply with any direction given under
sub-section (1), shall be liable to a penalty of not less than fifty thousand
rupees but which may extend to one thousand rupees for each day during
which such default continues, subject to a maximum of fifty lakh rupees in
40 case of an auditor, or one crore rupees in case of an audit firm.
132D. (1) The National Financial Reporting Authority may, after Power of
holding inquiry, in such manner as may be prescribed and after giving a Authority to
impose penalty.
reasonable opportunity of being heard, impose such penalty under
sub-section (4) of section 132A or sub-section (2) of section 132C, as it may
45 consider appropriate.
(2) While holding an inquiry, the National Financial Reporting Authority
shall have power to summon and enforce the attendance of any person
acquainted with the facts and circumstances of the case to give evidence or to
18
produce any document, which in the opinion of the said Authority, may be
useful for or relevant to the subject matter of the inquiry and if, on such inquiry,
it is satisfied that the person has failed to comply with the provisions of any of
the sections specified in sub-section (1), it may impose such penalty as it
considers appropriate in accordance with the provisions of any of those sections. 5
(3) The amount of any penalty imposed under this section, if not paid, may
be recovered by the National Financial Reporting Authority, in such manner as
may be prescribed, as if it were an arrear of land revenue.
(4) All sums realised by way of penalties under this section shall be
credited to the Consolidated Fund of India.
10
(5) Any person aggrieved by an order of the National Financial Reporting
Authority under this section may prefer an appeal before the Appellate Tribunal
within a period of forty-five days from the date on which a copy of the order of
said Authority is made available, in such manner and on payment of such fee,
as may be prescribed.
15
Civil courts not 132E. No civil court shall have jurisdiction to entertain any suit or
to have proceeding in respect of any matter which the National Financial Reporting
jurisdiction.
Authority is empowered to determine by or under this Act and no injunction
shall be granted by any court or other authority in respect of any action taken or
to be taken by the said Authority in pursuance of any power conferred by or 20
under this Act.
Protection of 132F. No suit, prosecution or other legal proceeding shall lie against the
action taken in Central Government or the National Financial Reporting Authority or the
good faith.
chairperson or any member or any officer or other employee of Authority for
anything which is in good faith done or intended to be done under this Act or 25
the rules or regulations made thereunder.
Power of Central 132G. Without prejudice to the provisions of this Act, the National
Government to Financial Reporting Authority shall, in exercise of its powers or the performance
give directions of its functions under this Act, be bound by such directions on questions of
to Authority.
policy, as the Central Government may give in writing to it from time to time: 30
Provided that the Authority shall, as far as practicable, be given an
opportunity to express its views before any direction is given under this section:
Provided further that the decision of the Central Government, on whether
a question is one of policy or not, shall be final.
Power of Central 132H. (1) If at any time, the Central Government is of the opinion— 35
Government to
supersede (a) that on account of grave emergency, the National Financial
Authority. Reporting Authority is unable to discharge the functions and duties
imposed on it by or under the provisions of this Act; or
(b) that the National Financial Reporting Authority has persistently
not complied with any direction given by the Central Government under 40
this Act or in the discharge of the functions and duties imposed on it by or
under the provisions of this Act, and as a result of such non-compliance,
the financial position or the administration of such Authority has
deteriorated; or
(c) that circumstances exist which render it necessary in the public 45
interest so to do,
the Central Government may, by notification, supersede the National Financial
Reporting Authority for such period, not exceeding six months, as may be
specified in the notification.
19
(2) Upon the publication of a notification under sub-section (1)
superseding the National Financial Reporting Authority,—
(a) the Chairperson and all the members shall, as from the date of
supersession, vacate their offices as such;
5 (b) all the powers, functions and duties which may, by or under the
provisions of this Act, be exercised or discharged by or on behalf of the
National Financial Reporting Authority shall, until the said Authority is
reconstituted under sub-section (3), be exercised and discharged by such
person or persons as the Central Government may direct; and
10 (c) all properties owned or controlled by the National Financial
Reporting Authority shall, until the said Authority is reconstituted under
sub-section (3), vest in the Central Government.
(3) On the expiration of the period of supersession specified in the
notification issued under sub-section (1), the Central Government may
15 reconstitute the National Financial Reporting Authority by a fresh appointment,
and in such case, any person or persons who vacated their offices under
clause (a) of the said sub-section, shall not be deemed disqualified for
appointment:
Provided that the Central Government may, at any time, before the
20 expiration of the period of supersession, take action under this sub-section.
(4) The Central Government shall cause a notification issued under
sub-section (1) and a full report of any action taken under this section and the
circumstances leading to such action to be laid before each House of Parliament
at the earliest.
25 132-I. (1) For the purposes of carrying out its functions under this Act, the Levy of fees or
National Financial Reporting Authority may levy such fees or other charges as other charges by
Authority.
may be specified by it by regulations, on the auditors of companies or class of
companies or bodies corporate referred to in clause (a) of sub-section (4) of
section 132.
30 (2) The payment of such fees or other charges shall be in such manner as
may be specified by regulations by the National Financial Reporting Authority.
132J. (1) The National Financial Reporting Authority may, by Power of
notification, make regulations consistent with this Act and the rules made Authority to
make
thereunder, for carrying out its functions under this Act.
regulations.
35 (2) In particular, and without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing
powers, such regulations may provide for all or any of the following matters,
namely:—
(a) the manner of investigation under clause (a) of sub-section (4)
of section 132;
40 (b) the place and time of meetings of the Authority and
the procedure to be followed at such meetings under
sub-section (10) of section 132;
(c) the manner of appointment, salary, allowances and other terms
and conditions of service of the secretary and employees of the Authority
45 under sub-section (11) of section 132;
(d) the manner of engagement of experts and professionals under
sub-section (17) of section 132;
(e) the documents, returns, or information, and the form, manner,
period, and fees for filing the same under sub-section (2) of section 132A;
20
(f) the manner of recovery of the amount of penalty under
sub-section (3) of section 132D; and
(g) the fees or other charges and the manner of payment thereof
under section 132-I.
(3) Every regulation made under this section shall be laid, as soon as may 5
be after it is made, before each House of Parliament, while it is in session, for a
total period of thirty days which may be comprised in one session or in two or
more successive sessions, and if, before the expiry of the session immediately
following the session or the successive sessions aforesaid, both Houses agree in
making any modification in the regulation, or both Houses agree that the 10
regulation should not be made, the regulation shall thereafter have effect only in
such modified form or be of no effect, as the case may be; so, however, that any
such modification or annulment shall be without prejudice to the validity of
anything previously done under that regulation.
Transparency in 132K. The Authority shall, prior to issuing regulations under section 132J, 15
making
ensure transparency by––
regulations.
(a) publishing the draft regulations along with all relevant details on
its website and inviting public comments for such period as may be
specified therein; and
(b) reviewing such regulations at least once in three years: 20
Provided that if the Authority is of the opinion that it is necessary or
expedient to make, or amend, any regulations urgently in public interest, or
where the subject matter of the regulations relates solely to the internal
functioning of the Authority, it may, for reasons to be recorded in writing for
doing so, make or amend such regulations without following the procedure 25
specified in clauses (a).”.
Amendment of 42. In section 134 of the principal Act, in sub-section (3),—
section 134.
(i) after clause (f), the following clause shall be inserted, namely:—
“(fa) explanations or comments by the Board on every observation
or comment of the auditors on financial transactions or matters which have 30
any adverse effect on the functioning of the company under clause (f) of
sub-section (3) of section 143 and any qualification, reservation or adverse
remark relating to the maintenance of accounts and other matters
connected therewith under clause (h) of the said sub-section in such form,
as may be prescribed.”; 35
(ii) after clause (p), the following clause shall be inserted, namely:—
“(pa) composition of the Audit Committee and where the Board had
not accepted any recommendation of the Audit Committee, a statement
along with the reasons therefor;”.
Amendment of 43. In section 135 of the principal Act,—
40
section 135.
(a) in sub-section (1), for the words “five crore”, the words “ten crore, or
such sum as may be prescribed” shall be substituted;
(b) in sub-section (6),––
(i) for the words, brackets and figure “amount remaining unspent
under sub-section (5)”, the words, brackets and figure “unspent amount 45
under sub-section (5)” shall be substituted;
(ii) for the words, “company within a period of thirty days”, the
words “company within a period of ninety days” shall be substituted;
21
(c) in sub-section (9), for the words “fifty lakh rupees”, the words
“one crore rupees or such higher amount as may be prescribed” shall be
substituted;
(d) after sub-section (9), the following sub-section shall be inserted,
5 namely:––
“(10) Such class or classes of companies which fulfil such
conditions, as may be prescribed, shall not be required to comply with the
provisions of this section.”.
44. In section 139 of the principal Act, after sub-section (11), the following Amendment of
section 139.
10 sub-section shall be inserted, namely:––
“(12) Such class or classes of companies which fulfil such
conditions as may be prescribed shall not be required to appoint auditors under
this Chapter.”.
45. In section 141 of the principal Act, in sub-section (1), after the proviso, the Amendment of
15 following proviso shall be inserted, namely:–– section 141.
“Provided further that every partner of the firm shall be a person who has
been registered with a statutory institute or body established under a law in India
having powers of such registration.”.
46. In section 144 of the principal Act, in the proviso, for the words “Provided Amendment of
section 144.
20 that”, the following shall be substituted, namely:—
“Provided that an auditor or audit firm of such class or classes of
companies, as may be prescribed, shall not provide, directly or indirectly, any
non-audit services to the company or its holding company or subsidiary:
Provided further that the restriction under this section shall also apply for
25 a period of three years after the auditor or audit firm has completed his or its
term under sub-section (2) of section 139:
Provided also that”.
Amendment of
47. In section 147 of the principal Act,––
section 147.
(a) in sub-section (1), the following proviso shall be inserted, namely:––
30 “Provided that in case of contravention of the provisions of
sub-sections (1), (5) to (8) and (11) of section 139, sub-section (4)
of section 140, sub-section (4) of section 141, sub-sections (1) and (2) of
section 142 and section 146, the company shall be liable to a
penalty of one lakh rupees and in case of continuing failure, with a further
35 penalty of five hundred rupees for each day, after the first during which
such failure continues, subject to a maximum of five lakh rupees
and every officer of the company who is in default shall be liable to a
penalty of twenty-five thousand rupees and in case of continuing
failure, with a further penalty of two hundred rupees for each day, after
40 the first during which such failure continues, subject to a maximum of one
lakh rupees.”;
(b) in sub-section (2), for the words and figures “section 139, section 144
or section 145”, the words, figures and brackets “section 139, section 143 [other
than sub-section (12)], section 144, section 145 or section 146” shall
45 be substituted.
22
Amendment of 48. In section 148 of the principal Act,––
section 148.
(a) after sub-section (1), the following sub-section shall be inserted,
namely:––
“(1A) The Central Government may provide for such standards, as
may be prescribed, of cost accounting or any addendum thereto, after 5
examination of recommendations of the Institute of Cost Accountants of
India, constituted under the Cost Accountants Act, 1959.”; 23 of 1959.
(b) in sub-section (3),––
(i) in the proviso, for the words “Provided that”, the following shall
be substituted, namely:–– 10
“Provided that a firm whereof majority of partners practising
in India who are qualified for appointment, may be appointed by
its firm name to be the cost auditor of a company:
Provided further that every partner of the firm shall be a
person who is registered with a statutory institute or body 15
established under a law in India, having powers of such
registration:
Provided also that”;
(ii) in the second proviso, for the words “Provided further”, the
words “Provided also” shall be substituted; 20
(iii) in the Explanation, for the words “the Cost and Works
Accountants”, the words “the Cost Accountants” shall be substituted;
(c) for sub-section (8), the following sub-sections shall be substituted,
namely:––
“(8) If the managing director, the whole-time director in charge of 25
finance, the Chief Financial Officer or any other person of a company
charged by the Board with duty of complying with the provisions of
sub-section (1), contravenes such provisions, such managing director,
whole-time director in charge of finance, Chief Financial Officer or such
other person of the company, shall be liable to a penalty of five lakh 30
rupees in case of a listed company and fifty thousand rupees in case of
any other company.
(9) If any default is made in complying with the provisions of
sub-section (3) relating to appointment of Cost Accountant by the Board
on such remuneration as may be determined by the members, or 3 5
sub-section (6) or sub-section (7), the company shall be liable to a
penalty of ten thousand rupees and in case of continuing default, with a
further penalty of one hundred rupees for each day during which such
failure continues, subject to a maximum of two lakh rupees and every
officer of the company who is in default shall be liable to a penalty of 40
ten thousand rupees and in case of continuing default, with a further
penalty of one hundred rupees for each day, after the first during which
such default continues, subject to a maximum of fifty thousand rupees.
(10) If any default is made in complying with provisions of this
section, other than those referred to in sub-sections (8) and (9),––
45
(a) the company and every officer of the company who is in
default shall be punishable in the manner as provided in
sub-section (1) of section 147; and
23
(b) the cost auditor of the company who is in default shall be
punishable in the manner as provided in sub-sections (2) to (4) of
the said section.”.
49. In section 149 of the principal Act,— Amendment of
section 149.
5 (i) in sub-section (6), in clause (e),––
(a) in sub-clause (i), after the words “preceding the financial year”,
the words “or during the current financial year” shall be inserted;
(b) in sub-clause (ii),––
(i) in the opening portion, after the words “preceding the
10 financial year”, the words “or during the current financial year”
shall be inserted;
(ii) in item (A), for the words “company secretaries in
practice”, the words “secretarial auditors” shall be substituted;
(iii) in item (B), for the words “amounting to ten per cent. or
15 more”, the words “amounting to ten per cent. or such lower
per cent., as may be prescribed” shall be substituted;
(ii) after sub-section (6), the following sub-section shall be inserted,
namely:—
“(6A) Every independent director shall ensure that he continues to
20 fulfil the requirements specified under sub-section (6) during the term of
his appointment.”;
(iii) in sub-section (11),—
(a) in the proviso, after the word “company”, the words “or its
holding, subsidiary or associate company” shall be inserted;
25 (b) after the proviso, the following proviso shall be inserted,
namely:—
“Provided further that where the provisions of item (B) of
sub-clause (ii) of clause (e) of sub-section (6) apply to an
independent director, he may continue as an employee or
30 proprietor or partner of the legal or consulting firm, in case the
transaction of such legal or consulting firm with the company, its
holding or subsidiary or associate company is less than ten per
cent. or the lower per cent. referred to in the said item, of the gross
turnover of such firm.”;
35 (c) the Explanation shall be numbered as Explanation 1 thereof
and after Explanation 1 as so numbered, the following Explanation shall
be inserted, namely:—
“Explanation 2.—For the purposes of sub-sections (10) and
(11), any period during which an independent director has served
40 as an additional director of the company, shall be included in his
tenure as an independent director.”.
50. In section 152 of the principal Act, in sub-section (3),–– Amendment of
section 152.
(a) after the words “shall be appointed”, the words “or shall continue to
function” shall be inserted;
45 (b) after the word and figures “section 153”, the words “and the said
Director Identification Number or the other number is not deactivated or
cancelled” shall be inserted.
24
Amendment of 51. Section 154 of the principal Act shall be numbered as sub-section (1)
section 154.
thereof and after sub-section (1) as so numbered, the following sub-sections shall
be inserted, namely:—
“(2) A person who has been allotted Director Identification Number under
sub-section (1) shall submit such information towards verification of his 5
particulars to the Central Government or an officer authorised by that Government
in this behalf at such intervals and in such manner, as may be prescribed.
(3) Where––
(a) the person referred to in sub-section (2) does not comply with
the provisions of the said sub-section; or
10
(b) the Director Identification Number has been allotted in
contravention of the provisions of this Act or the rules made thereunder; or
(c) a director has incurred disqualification in one or more
companies pursuant to the provisions of section 164, or where the
Tribunal or any competent court has passed an order in this regard, 15
the Director Identification Number allotted to him may be deactivated or
cancelled, in such manner as may be prescribed, by the Central Government
or the officer authorised by that Government in this behalf.
(4) Where the Director Identification Number allotted to a director is
deactivated, he shall not function as a director till it gets reactivated. 20
(5) In case the Director Identification Number allotted to a director is
cancelled, the office of such a director shall become vacant.
(6) A person may surrender the Director Identification Number allotted
to him in such manner as may be prescribed.
(7) Where a Director Identification Number has been deactivated or 25
cancelled or surrendered under sub-section (3) or sub-section (6), it may be
reactivated or restored on fulfilment of such conditions and on payment of
such fees and in such manner, as may be prescribed.”.
Amendment of 52. In section 159 of the principal Act,––
section 159.
(a) for the words “which may extend to”, the word “of” shall be 30
substituted;
(b) after the words “default continues”, the words “subject to a
maximum of five lakh rupees” shall be inserted.
Amendment of 53. In section 161 of the principal Act,––
section 161.
(a) in sub-section (1), for the words “, other than a person who fails to get 35
appointed as a director in a general meeting, as an additional director at any time
who shall hold office up to the date of the next annual general meeting or the last
date on which the annual general meeting should have been held, whichever is
earlier”, the words “as an additional director at any time who shall hold office up
to the date of the next general meeting or up to a period of three months from the 40
date of his appointment, whichever is earlier” shall be substituted;
(b) in sub-section (4), for the words “filled by the Board of Directors at a
meeting of the Board which shall be subsequently approved by members in the
immediate next general meeting”, the words “appointed by the Board of Directors
at a meeting of the Board and the person so appointed shall hold office up to the 45
date of the next general meeting or up to a period of three months from the date of
his appointment, whichever is earlier” shall be substituted;
25
(c) after sub-section (4), the following sub-section shall be inserted,
namely:—
“(5) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-sections (1) to (4),
a person whose appointment as a director could not be considered or
5 could not be approved in a general meeting, shall not be appointed by
the Board as an additional director, or alternate director or a director
against a casual vacancy under this section without the prior approval of
its members.”.
54. In section 164 of the principal Act,— Amendment of
section 164.
10 (a) in sub-section (1),—
(i) in clause (g),―
(A) for the words “dealing with related party transactions”,
the words “or subjected to penalty for default” shall be substituted;
(B) the word “or” occurring at the end shall be omitted;
15 (ii) in clause (h), for the word and figures “section 152.”, the word
and figures “section 152;” shall be substituted;
(iii) after clause (i), the following shall be inserted, namely:—
“(j) he has been an auditor or a secretarial auditor or a cost
auditor or a registered valuer or an insolvency professional of the
20 company or its holding, subsidiary or associate company
discharging the functions as such under this Act or under the
31 of 2016. Insolvency and Bankruptcy Code, 2016 during the immediately
preceding three financial years or during the current financial year.
Explanation.—For the purposes of this clause, where the
audit or secretarial audit or cost audit of a company is conducted,
25
or valuation services or insolvency professional services are
provided, by a partnership firm or a limited liability partnership,
such partner or partners of the partnership firm or a limited liability
partnership, as the case may be, who conducted the audit or
provided the valuation services or insolvency professional
30
services, as the case may be, shall not be eligible for appointment
as a director under this sub-section; or
(k) he has not been assessed by the Board to be a fit and
proper person in accordance with such criteria, as may be
35 prescribed:
Provided that different criteria for fit and proper person may
be prescribed for different class or classes of companies.”;
(b) in sub-section (2),––
(i) in clause (a), for the words “three financial years”, the words
40 “two financial years” shall be substituted;
(ii) in the longline, after the words “fails to do so”, the words,
brackets and figures “and office of director shall become vacant as per
the provisions of sub-section (1) of section 167” shall be inserted.
55. In section 165 of the principal Act, in sub-section (1),–– Amendment of
section 165.
45 (a) after the proviso, the following proviso shall be inserted, namely:––
“Provided further that the Central Government may, by
notification, specify a lower number under this sub-section for a class or
classes of companies or a class or classes of directors.”;
26
(b) in Explanation II, for the words “of twenty companies”, the words
“under this section” shall be substituted.
Amendment of 56. In section 166 of the principal Act,—
section 166.
(a) in sub-section (7),―
(i) for the words “provisions of this section”, the words, brackets 5
and figure “provisions of sub-section (5),” shall be substituted;
(ii) after the words “five lakh rupees”, the words, brackets and
figure “and the court may also order such director to pay the amount of
undue gains referred to in sub-section (5) to the company” shall be
10
inserted;
(b) after sub-section (7), the following sub-section shall be inserted,
namely:—
“(8) If a director of the company makes default in complying with
the provisions of this section [except sub-section (5)], he shall,—
(i) in case of a listed company, be liable to a penalty of five 15
lakh rupees; and
(ii) in case of any other company, be liable to a penalty of
two lakh rupees.”.
Amendment of
57. In section 167 of the principal Act,—
section 167.
(a) in sub-section (1), in clause (a), for the proviso, the following shall 20
be substituted, namely:—
“Provided that where he incurs disqualification under
sub-section (2) of section 164, the office of the director shall become
vacant in every company, where he is a director (including the company
which is in default under that sub-section), after six months from the date 25
of incurring such disqualification or upon expiry of his tenure in such
company, whichever is earlier.
Explanation.––For the purposes of this clause, the date of
incurring the disqualification shall be the date on which the company
fails to comply with the provisions of clause (a) or clause (b) of 3 0
sub-section (2) of section 164.”;
(b) in sub-section (2), for the words “he shall be punishable with fine
which shall not be less than one lakh rupees but which may extend to five lakh
rupees”, the following shall be substituted, namely:―
“or that his Director Identification Number has been deactivated 35
or cancelled, he shall,—
(i) in case of listed company, be liable to a penalty of five lakh
rupees; and
(ii) in case of any other company, be liable to a penalty of
40
two lakh rupees.”.
Amendment of 58. In section 173 of the principal Act, in sub-section (5), for the words “each
section 173. half of a calendar year and the gap between the two meetings is not less than ninety
days”, the words “a calendar year” shall be substituted.
Amendment of 59. In section 184 of the principal Act, in sub-section (1), the words “at the
section 184. first meeting of the Board in every financial year or” shall be omitted. 45
Amendment of 60. In section 185 of the principal Act, in sub-section (1), in clause (b), after
section 185. the words “any firm”, the words “or limited liability partnership” shall be inserted.
27
61. In section 186 of the principal Act,–– Amendment of
section 186.
(a) in sub-section (13), after the words “the provisions of this section”,
the brackets, words and figures “[except sub-sections (9) and (10)]” shall be
inserted;
5 (b) after sub-section (13), the following sub-section shall be inserted,
namely:––
“(14) If a company contravenes the provisions of sub-section (9)
or sub-section (10), the company shall be liable to a penalty of one lakh
rupees and in case of continuing contravention, with a further penalty of
10 five hundred rupees for each day, after the first during which such
contravention continues, subject to a maximum of five lakh rupees and
every officer of the company who is in default shall be liable to a penalty
of twenty-five thousand rupees and in case of continuing default, with a
further penalty of two hundred rupees for each day, after the first during
15 which such default continues, subject to a maximum of one lakh
rupees.”.
62. In section 189 of the principal Act, after sub-section (5), the following Amendment of
sub-section shall be inserted, namely:–– section 189.
“(5A) Every company which fails to comply with the provisions of this
20 section and the rules made thereunder shall be liable to a penalty of two lakh
rupees.”.
63. After section 203 of the principal Act, the following section shall be Insertion of new
inserted, namely:— section 203A.
“203A. (1) A whole-time key managerial personnel of a company, who Resignation of a
25 is not a director, may resign from his office by giving a notice in writing to the whole-time key
managerial
company, and the Board shall, on receipt of such notice, take note of the same
personnel, who
and shall intimate the Registrar of such resignation in such form and manner is not a director.
and within such time, as may be prescribed:
Provided that where the company fails to intimate the Registrar under
30 this sub-section within such time the said key managerial personnel may
forward a copy of his resignation along with detailed reasons for his
resignation to the Registrar in such manner, as may be prescribed.
(2) The resignation of a key managerial personnel under sub-section (1)
shall take effect from the date on which the notice is received by the company
35 or the date, if any, specified by such key managerial personnel in the notice,
whichever is later:
Provided that such key managerial personnel who has resigned shall be
liable even after his resignation for the default for which he was liable during
his tenure.”.
40 64. In section 204 of the principal Act,–– Amendment of
section 204.
(a) in sub-section (1), for the words “company secretary in practice”, the
words “secretarial auditor” shall be substituted;
(b) after sub-section (1), the following sub-section shall be inserted,
namely:––
45 “(1A) A person shall be eligible for appointment as a secretarial
auditor of a company only if he is a company secretary in practice:
Provided that a firm, whereof majority of partners practising in
India who are qualified for appointment, may be appointed by its firm
name to be the secretarial auditor of a company:
28
Provided further that every partner of the firm shall be a person
who has been registered with a statutory institute or body established
under a law in India having powers of such registration.”;
(c) in sub-sections (2) to (4), for the words “company secretary in
practice”, wherever they occur, the words “secretarial auditor” shall be 5
substituted.
65. In section 206 of the principal Act, for sub-section (7), the following
Amendment of
section 206. sub-section shall be substituted, namely:––
“(7) If a company fails to furnish any information or explanation or
produce any document required under this section, the company shall be liable 10
to a penalty of one lakh rupees and in case of continuing failure, with a further
penalty of five hundred rupees for each day, after the first during which such
failure continues, subject to a maximum of five lakh rupees and every officer
of the company who is in default shall be liable to a penalty of twenty-five
thousand rupees and in case of continuing failure, with a further penalty of 15
two hundred rupees for each day, after the first during which such failure
continues, subject to a maximum of one lakh rupees.”.
Amendment of 66. In section 222 of the principal Act,––
section 222.
(a) in sub-section (1), for the brackets, figure and word “(1) Where”, the
word “Where” shall be substituted; 20
(b) sub-section (2) shall be omitted.
Amendment of 67. In section 230 of the principal Act,––
section 230.
(a) in sub-section (1),––
(i) the words and figures “or under the Insolvency and Bankruptcy
Code, 2016, as the case may be,” shall be omitted; 25 31 of 2016.
(ii) before the Explanation, the following provisos shall be
inserted, namely:––
“Provided that on and from the commencement of the
Corporate Laws (Amendment) Act, 2026, every application to be
made under this section or sections 231 to 233 to the Tribunal, shall 30
be made to the Tribunal having jurisdiction over the transferee
company or the resultant company, as the case may be, and such
Tribunal shall exercise all the powers of the Tribunal referred to in
such sections for all the companies involved in the schemes of
compromise or arrangement or amalgamations: 35
Provided further that any application pending before the
Tribunal as on the date of commencement of the Corporate Laws
(Amendment) Act, 2026, shall continue to be dealt with by
the Tribunal in accordance with the provisions applicable before
such commencement.”; 40
(b) in sub-section (6), the words and figures “or under the Insolvency
and Bankruptcy Code, 2016, as the case may be” shall be omitted. 31 of 2016.
Amendment of 68. In section 232 of the principal Act, in sub-section (3), in clause (b), in the
section 232.
proviso, after the words “or extinguished” occurring at the end, the words “on the
45
merger or amalgamation” shall be inserted.
Amendment of 69. In section 233 of the principal Act,—
section 233.
(a) in sub-section (1),––
(i) for clause (b), the following clause shall be substituted,
namely:—
29
“(b) the objections and suggestions received are considered
by the companies in their respective general meetings and the
scheme is approved by a majority of members or class of members
present and voting at the meeting held in such manner, as may be
prescribed, who hold at least seventy-five per cent. of the value in
5
shares held by such members present and voting;”;
(ii) in clause (d), for the word “nine-tenths”, the words “at least
three-fourths” shall be substituted;
(b) in sub-section (2), the following proviso shall be inserted, namely:—
10 “Provided that the copy of the scheme need not be filed with the
Official Liquidator in case it pertains to transfer or division of the
undertaking of the company.”;
(c) in sub-section (13), after the words “of companies”, the words “on
such terms and conditions and” shall be inserted.
15 70. After section 233 of the principal Act, the following section shall be Insertion of new
inserted, namely:— section 233A.
“233A. (1) Where a transferee company, as a result of a compromise or Treatment of
an arrangement which has taken place prior to the commencement of the certain shares
held in a name
18 of 2013. Companies Act, 2013, has held any shares in its own name or in the name of
of a company or
20 any trust (whether on its behalf or on behalf of any of its subsidiary or associate trust.
companies), such shares shall, within a period not exceeding three years from
the date of commencement of the Corporate Laws (Amendment) Act, 2026,
be dealt with or disposed of in such manner, as may be prescribed.
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in this Act, if a company fails
25 to deal with or dispose of the shares referred to in sub-section (1), such shares
shall be cancelled and extinguished by the company in such manner, as may
be prescribed, and such cancellation and extinguishment shall be deemed to
be a reduction of the share capital of the company.
(3) If the company fails to comply with the provisions of sub-section (2), the
30 company and every officer of the company who is in default, shall be liable to a
penalty of ten thousand rupees for every day during which the default continues.”.
71. In section 242 of the principal Act, sub-section (8) shall be omitted. Amendment of
section 242.
72. In section 245 of the principal Act, in sub-section (1), for the word, brackets Amendment of
and figure “sub-section (2)”, the word, brackets and figure “sub-section (3)” shall be section 245.
35 substituted.
Amendment of
73. In section 247 of the principal Act,—
section 247.
(a) in sub-section (1), for the words “it shall be valued by a person
having such qualifications and experience, registered as a valuer and being a
member of an organisation recognised, in such manner, on such terms and
40 conditions as may be prescribed and appointed by the audit committee or in
its absence by the Board of Directors of that company”, the following shall be
substituted, namely:––
“it shall be valued by a person, who––
(a) has such qualifications and experience as may be
45 specified by regulations by the Valuation Authority;
(b) is a member of a recognised valuers’ organisation; and
(c) holds a valid certificate of registration as a valuer.”;
(b) after sub-section (1), the following sub-sections shall be inserted,
namely:—
30
“(1A) The Insolvency and Bankruptcy Board of India established
under section 188 of the Insolvency and Bankruptcy Code, 2016 shall be 31 of 2016.
the Valuation Authority for the purposes of this section.
(1B) The Valuation Authority shall––
(a) grant or renew certificate of recognition to valuers’ 5
organisations subject to such terms and conditions as may be
specified by regulations by the Valuation Authority;
(b) grant or renew certificate of registration to valuers subject
to such terms and conditions as may be specified by regulations by
the Valuation Authority; 10
(c) make recommendations to the Central Government on the
formulation and laying down of the valuation standards and
policies;
(d) monitor and enforce the compliance with valuation
standards and policies in such manner, as may be specified by 15
regulations by the Valuation Authority;
(e) oversee the affairs and quality of service of the recognised
valuers’ organisations and registered valuers referred to in
sub-section (1);
(f) perform such other functions relating to clauses (a) to (e), 20
as may be prescribed.
(1C) A valuation under this Act shall be undertaken only by a
registered valuer who shall be appointed by the audit committee or in its
absence, by the Board of Directors of that company, and in other cases,
by such person, as may be prescribed.”; 25
(c) in sub-section (2),––
(i) for the words, brackets and figure “The valuer appointed under
sub-section (1)”, the words, brackets, figure and letter “The registered
valuer appointed under sub-section (1C)” shall be substituted;
(ii) in clause (c), for the words “in accordance with such rules as 30
may be prescribed”, the words “in accordance with such valuation
standards and policies, as may be prescribed and in such manner as may
be specified by the Valuation Authority” shall be substituted;
(d) for sub-section (3), the following sub-sections shall be substituted,
35
namely:—
“(3) If a recognised valuers’ organisation contravenes the
provisions of this section or rules or regulations made thereunder, the
Valuation Authority may suspend or cancel its certificate, for a
minimum period of six months or such higher period not exceeding
ten years, in such manner as may be specified by regulations made 40
by the Valuation Authority, or impose a penalty of up to one crore
rupees, or both;
(3A) If a registered valuer contravenes the provisions of this
section or the rules or regulations made thereunder, the Valuation
Authority may suspend or cancel the certificate of registration, for a
45
minimum period of six months or such higher period not exceeding
ten years in such manner as may be specified by regulations made by
the Valuation Authority, or impose a penalty of up to ten lakh rupees,
or both.
31
(3B) Any person aggrieved by an order of the Valuation Authority
under sub-section (3) or (3A), may prefer an appeal before the Appellate
Tribunal within a period of forty-five days from the date of receipt of
such order by him, in such manner and on payment of such fees, as may
be prescribed.
5
(3C) A registered valuer, who has contravened the provisions of
this section or rules or regulations made thereunder with the intention to
defraud any person, shall be punishable with imprisonment for a term
which may extend to one year and with fine which shall not be less than
10 fifty thousand rupees, but which may extend to twenty-five lakh rupees
or eight times the remuneration of valuer, whichever is less.
(3D) A recognised valuers’ organisation which has contravened
the provisions of this section or the rules or regulations made thereunder
with the intention to defraud any person, shall be punishable with fine
15 which shall not be less than ten lakh rupees, but which may extend to
one crore rupees and every officer of the organisation who is in default
shall be punishable with imprisonment for a term which may extend to
one year and with fine which shall not be less than fifty thousand rupees,
but which may extend to twenty-five lakh rupees.
20 (3E) Notwithstanding anything to the contrary contained in
section 439, no court shall take cognizance of any offence under
sub-section (3C) or sub-section (3D), which is alleged to have been
committed by any recognised valuers’ organisation or any registered
valuer, except on a complaint in writing by an officer authorised in this
25 behalf by the Valuation Authority or by the Central Government.”;
(e) in sub-section (4), in the opening portion, for the words, brackets and
figure “under sub-section (3)”, the words, brackets, figure and letter “under
sub-section (3C)” shall be substituted;
(f) after sub-section (4), the following shall be inserted, namely:—
‘(5) The Valuation Authority shall make recommendations to the
30
Central Government on the formulation and laying down of valuation
policies and standards for adoption by companies or class of companies
or such entities or class of entities, as may be prescribed.
(6) After examination of the recommendations of the Valuation
35 Authority, as may be prescribed, the Central Government may provide
such valuation standards or valuation policies or any addendum thereto.
(7) Without prejudice to the provisions of this Act, the Valuation
Authority shall, in exercise of its powers or the performance of its
functions under this Act, be bound by such directions on questions of
40 policy, as the Central Government may give in writing to it from time to
time:
Provided that the Valuation Authority shall, except for reasons to
be recorded in writing, be given an opportunity to express its views
before any direction is given under this section:
Provided further that the decision of the Central Government, on
45
whether a question is one of policy or not, shall be final.
(8) The Valuation Authority may, by a notification, delegate to any
member, officer or any other person, subject to such conditions, if any,
as may be specified in the notification, such of its powers and functions
50 under this section as it deems necessary.
32
(9) The Valuation Authority may, by notification, make
regulations consistent with this Act and rules made thereunder, for
carrying out its functions under this section and for matters incidental or
connected thereto.
(10) In particular, and without prejudice to the generality of the 5
foregoing powers, such regulations may provide for all or any of the
following matters, namely:––
(a) qualifications and experience of valuers who may be
registered under sub-section (1);
(b) the terms and conditions under which an organisation 10
may be recognised under sub-section (1B);
(c) the terms and conditions under which the valuers may be
registered under sub-section (1B);
(d) the manner in which the valuation shall be made by the
valuers under clause (c) of sub-section (2);
15
(e) inspection and investigation of affairs of the organisations
which are recognised and registered valuers under clause (e) of
sub-section (1B);
(f) manner of suspension or cancellation of certificate of
registration of the valuer or certificate of recognition of the 20
organisation, as the case may be, and imposition of penalty by the
Valuation Authority under sub-section (3) or (3A);
(g) manner of delegation of powers by the Valuation
Authority to its members or officers under sub-section (8);
(h) for any other matter for carrying out the provisions of this 25
section.
(11) Every regulation made under this section shall be laid, as soon
as may be after it is made, before each House of Parliament, while it is
in session, for a total period of thirty days which may be comprised in
one session or in two or more successive sessions, and if, before the 30
expiry of the session immediately following the session or the successive
sessions aforesaid, both Houses agree in making any modification in the
regulation, or both Houses agree that the regulation should not be made,
the regulation shall thereafter have effect only in such modified form or
be of no effect, as the case may be; so, however, that any such 35
modification or annulment shall be without prejudice to the validity of
anything previously done under that regulation.
Explanation.––For the purposes of this section, the expression
“recognised valuers’ organisation” means an organisation which has
been recognised under clause (a) of sub-section (1B).’. 40
Amendment of 74. In section 248 of the principal Act,—
section 248.
(a) in sub-section (1),––
(i) in clause (c),––
(A) after the words “preceding financial years”, the words
“and in the current financial year, or has not made any significant 45
accounting transaction during the preceding two financial years
and in the current financial year, or has not filed financial
statements or annual returns that were due to be filed for two
consecutive financial years preceding the previous financial year”
shall be inserted; 50
33
(B) after the words and figures “section 455; or”, the
following shall be inserted, namely:––
‘Illustration.
Where, during examination in the month of June, 2025,
5 it was found that a company had not filed the financial
statements, or had not filed the annual returns, for the
financial years 2022-23 and 2023-24, then a company would
be covered under this clause.
Explanation.––For the purposes of this clause, the
10 expression “significant accounting transaction” shall have
the meaning assigned to it in clause (ii) of the Explanation to
sub-section (1) of section 455.’;
(b) in sub-section (2),––
(i) after the words “extinguishing all its liabilities”, the words “in
15 such manner as may be prescribed,” shall be inserted;
(ii) the words, brackets and figure “on all or any of the grounds
specified in sub-section (1)” shall be omitted;
(c) in sub-section (5),—
(i) after the words “mentioned in the notice”, the words, brackets
20 and figure “published under sub-section (4)” shall be inserted;
(ii) after the words “is shown by the company”, the words “or by
any other person” shall be inserted;
(d) in sub-section (6),—
(i) for the words “before passing an order”, the words “before
25 striking off the name of the company” shall be substituted;
(ii) in the proviso, for the words “date of the order removing the
name”, the words “date of striking off the name” shall be substituted.
75. In section 249 of the principal Act, in sub-section (2), for the words Amendment of
section 249.
“punishable with fine which may extend to one lakh rupees”, the words “liable to a
30
penalty of fifty thousand rupees” shall be substituted.
Amendment of
76. In section 252 of the principal Act,— section 252.
(a) in the marginal heading, for the word “Tribunal”, the words
“Regional Director or Tribunal” shall be substituted;
(b) in sub-section (1),––
35 (i) for the word “Tribunal” wherever it occurs, the words
“Regional Director” shall be substituted;
(ii) for the words “it may order”, the words “the Regional Director
may order” shall be substituted;
(c) in sub-section (2), for the word “Tribunal”, the words, brackets and
40
figures “Regional Director under sub-section (1) or the Tribunal under
sub-section (3), as the case may be,” shall be substituted.
77. In section 271 of the principal Act,–– Amendment of
section 271.
(a) in clause (a), the words “by the Tribunal” shall be omitted;
(b) in clause (c), the words “by notification under this Act” shall be
45 omitted.
78. In section 361 of the principal Act,–– Amendment of
section 361.
(a) in sub-section (1),––
34
(i) for the words “under this Chapter”, the words, brackets, letters
and figures “in accordance with the provisions of this Chapter under the
circumstances referred to in clauses (a), (b) and (d) of section 271” shall
be substituted;
(ii) in clause (i), for the word “and”, the word “or” shall be 5
substituted;
(b) for sub-section (2), the following sub-section shall be substituted,
namely:––
“(2) Where an order under sub-section (1) is made, the Central
Government shall––
10
(a) appoint the Official Liquidator as the liquidator of the
company; or
(b) appoint an insolvency professional registered under the
Insolvency and Bankruptcy Code, 2016, as liquidator of the 31 of 2016.
company to carry out the functions of Official Liquidator under 15
this Part.”;
(c) in sub-section (5),––
(i) after the words “affairs of the company”, the words “by the
Official Liquidator or any officer not below the rank of Assistant
Director as may be authorised by the Central Government in this behalf” 20
shall be inserted;
(ii) for the words “as may be specified”, the words “as it may
direct” shall be substituted;
(d) in sub-section (6), for the words “under the provision”, the words
“continued under the provision” shall be substituted; 25
(e) after sub-section (6), the following Explanation shall be inserted,
namely:––
‘Explanation.––For the purposes of sections 361 to 365, the term
“Official Liquidator” shall include an insolvency professional registered
under the Insolvency and Bankruptcy Code, 2016 who has been 30 31 of 2016.
appointed under sub-section (2).’.
Amendment of 79. In section 365 of the principal Act, in sub-section (3), for the word
section 365. “notification”, the words “notice in the Official Gazette” shall be substituted.
Insertion of new 80. After section 365 of the principal Act, the following section shall be
section 365A. inserted, namely:–– 35
Appeal under “365A. Any person aggrieved by an order of the Central Government
this Part. under this Part, may prefer an appeal within a period of forty-five days from
the date of receipt of such order by him, before the Appellate Tribunal in such
manner and on payment of such fee, as may be prescribed.”.
Amendment of 81. In section 366 of the principal Act, in sub-section (1), after the words 4 0
section 366. “co-operative society, society”, the words “, any non-trading company” shall
be inserted.
Amendm ent of 82. In section 374 of the principal Act, in clause (c),––
section 374.
(a) for the words “an affidavit, duly notarised”, the words “a declaration,
in such form as may be prescribed” shall be substituted; 45
(b) after the words “co-operative society, society”, the words “, any
non-trading company” shall be inserted.
Amendment of 83. In section 378P of the principal Act,––
section 378P.
(a) sub-section (2) shall be omitted;
35
(b) for sub-section (5), the following sub-section shall be substituted,
namely:––
“(5) The directors of the Board shall be elected or appointed by the
Members in the general meetings.”.
5 84. In section 378Q of the principal Act, in sub-section (1), in clause (b), for Amendment of
the words “ninety days”, the words “one hundred and eighty days” shall be section 378Q.
substituted.
85. In section 378Y of the principal Act, after the words “total membership”, Amendment of
the words “or one hundred members, whichever is less,” shall be inserted. section 378Y.
10 86. In section 378ZA of the principal Act,–– Amendment of
section 378ZA.
(a) in sub-section (1), in the proviso, for the words “Provided that”, the
following shall be substituted, namely:––
“Provided that in case of the first annual general meeting, it shall
be held within a period of nine months from the date of closing of the
15 first financial year of the company and in any other case, within a period
of six months, from the date of closing of the financial year:
Provided further that if a company holds such first annual general
meeting, it shall not be necessary for the company to hold any annual
general meeting in the year of its incorporation:
20 Provided also that”;
(b) sub-section (2) shall be omitted;
(c) for sub-section (3), the following sub-section shall be substituted,
namely:––
“(3) The Members shall adopt the articles of the Producer
25 Company referred to in clause (b) of sub-section (1) of section 378G and
appoint directors of its Board in the first annual general meeting.”;
(d) in sub-section (9), for the words “members of the Producer Company
shall”, the words “members or one hundred members of the Producer
Company, whichever is less, shall” shall be substituted.
30 87. For section 378ZF of the principal Act, the following section shall be Amendment of
substituted, namely:–– section 378ZF.
“378ZF. (1) Every Producer Company having an average annual
turnover exceeding five crore rupees or such other amount, as may be
prescribed, in each of the three consecutive financial years, shall be required
to appoint an internal auditor, who shall either be a chartered accountant or a
35
cost accountant, or such other professional as may be decided by the Board,
to conduct internal audit of the functions and activities of the Producer
Company.
(2) The manner and the intervals in which the internal audit shall be
40 conducted and reported to the Board, shall be such as may be prescribed.”.
88. In section 378ZM of the principal Act,–– Amendment of
section 378ZM.
(a) in sub-section (1), for the words “punishable with fine which may
extend to ten thousand rupees for every day during which such name has been
used by him”, the words “liable to a penalty of one lakh rupees and in case of
45 continuing failure, with a further penalty of five hundred rupees for each day,
after the first during which such failure continues, subject to a maximum of
five lakh rupees” shall be substituted;
36
(b) in sub-section (2), for the words “imprisonment for a term which may
extend to six months and with fine equivalent to five per cent. of the turnover of
that Company during the preceding financial year”, the words “a penalty of
twenty-five thousand rupees and in case of continuing failure, with a further
penalty of two hundred rupees for each day, after the first during which such 5
failure continues, subject to a maximum of five lakh rupees” shall be substituted;
(c) for sub-section (3), the following sub-section shall be substituted,
namely:––
“(3) If a director or officer of a Producer Company—
(a) fails to hand over the custody of books of account and 10
other documents or property in his custody to the Producer
Company of which he is a director or officer; or
(b) fails to convene annual general meeting or other general
meetings,
he shall be liable to a penalty of twenty-five thousand rupees and in case 15
of continuing failure, with a further penalty of two hundred rupees for
each day, after the first during which such failure continues, subject to a
maximum of one lakh rupees.”.
89. In section 378ZS of the principal Act, for sub-section (6), the following
Amendment of
section 378ZS. sub-section shall be substituted, namely:–– 20
“(6) If default is made in complying with sub-section (4), the company
and every officer of the company, who is in default, shall be liable to a penalty
of one hundred rupees, for each copy in respect of which default is made.”.
Amendment of 90. In section 392 of the principal Act, for the portion beginning with “shall
section 392. be punishable with fine” and ending with “may extend to five lakh rupees”, the 25
words “shall be liable to a penalty of one lakh rupees and in case of continuing
contravention, with a further penalty of five hundred rupees for each day, after the
first during which such contravention continues, subject to a maximum of five lakh
rupees and every officer of the company who is in default shall be liable to a penalty
of twenty-five thousand rupees and in case of continuing contravention, with a 30
further penalty of two hundred rupees for each day, after the first during which such
failure continues, subject to a maximum of two lakh rupees” shall be substituted.
91. In section 396 of the principal Act,––
Amendment of
section 396.
(a) in the marginal heading, for the word “offices”, the words “and other
offices” shall be substituted; 35
(b) after sub-section (1), the following sub-section shall be inserted,
namely:––
“(1A) The Central Government may appoint such number of Regional
Directors, Additional Regional Directors or Joint Regional Directors or
Deputy Regional Directors as it considers necessary for discharge of various 40
functions under this Act, and the powers and duties that may be exercisable
by such officers shall be such as may be prescribed.”;
(c) in sub-section (2), after the words “Assistant Registrars”, the words
“or such other officers” shall be inserted;
(d) after sub-section (2), the following sub-section shall be inserted,
45
namely:––
“(2A) The Central Government may authorise one or more officers
not below the rank of Assistant Director or Assistant Registrar of that
Government to exercise such powers and duties of the Regional Director
or the Registrar and to discharge such functions under this Act as it may 50
specify, by notification.”.
37
92. After section 396 of the principal Act, the following section shall be Insertion of new
section 396A.
inserted, namely:––
“396A. Any person aggrieved by the decision of the Registrar under Grievance
mechanism
section 4 or section 7, may prefer an appeal to an officer not below the rank
against decision
5 of the Joint Director as may be authorised by the Central Government, in such of Registrar
form and manner, and within such period as may be prescribed.”. under section 7.
93. In section 403 of the principal Act, in sub-section (1),–– Amendment of
section 403.
(a) in the first proviso, for the words “shall not be less than one hundred
rupees per day”, the words “shall not be less than such amount per day as may
10 be prescribed” shall be substituted;
(b) in the second proviso, for the words “Provided further”, the following
shall be substituted, namely:––
“Provided further that the amount of additional fees shall not
exceed two lakh rupees for such class or classes of companies, as may
15 be prescribed:
Provided also”.
94. In section 410 of the principal Act, in clause (a), after the words “National Amendment of
Financial Reporting Authority”, the words “or of the Valuation Authority” shall be section 410.
inserted.
20 95. In section 418A of the principal Act, after sub-section (2), the following Amendment of
sub-section shall be inserted, namely:— section 418A.
“(3) If the Members of a Bench of the Appellate Tribunal differ in
opinion on any point or points, it shall be decided according to the majority, if
there is a majority, but if the Members are equally divided, they shall state the
25 point or points on which they differ, and the case shall be referred by the
Chairperson for hearing on such point or points by one or more of the other
Members of the Appellate Tribunal and such point or points shall be decided
according to the opinion of the majority of Members who have heard the case,
including those who first heard it.”.
3 0 96. In section 419 of the principal Act,— A
se
m
ct
e
io
n
n
d m
41
e
9
n
.
t of
(a) in sub-section (4), for the words and figures “Part II of”, the words
“any of the provisions of” shall be substituted;
(b) after sub-section (4), the following sub-section shall be inserted,
namely:—
35 “(4A) The President may, if he considers appropriate, constitute, in
such manner as may be prescribed, one or more Special Benches of the
Tribunal to exercise the powers of the Tribunal for the disposal of any
case or cases under this Act, or under the Insolvency and Bankruptcy
3 1 of 2016. Code, 2016.”.
40 97. In section 441 of the principal Act, in sub-section (1), in clause (b), for the Amendment of
words “does not exceed twenty-five lakh rupees”, the words “does not exceed one
section 441.
crore rupees” shall be substituted.
98. In section 446B of the principal Act, for the words “liable to a penalty Amendment of
which shall not be more than one-half of the penalty”, the words “liable to a penalty section 446B.
45 of one-half, or such per cent. not exceeding one-half, as may be prescribed, of the
penalty” shall be substituted.
38
Amendment of 99. In section 447 of the principal Act,––
section 447.
(a) for the words “ten lakh rupees”, the words “twenty-five lakh rupees”
shall be substituted;
(b) in the second proviso, for the words “fifty lakh rupees”, the words
“one crore rupees” shall be substituted. 5
Amendment of 100. In section 453 of the principal Act, for the words “punishable with fine
section 453. which shall not be less than five hundred rupees but may extend to two thousand
rupees for every day”, the words “shall be liable to a penalty of one lakh rupees and
in case of continuing failure, with a further penalty of five hundred rupees for each
day, after the first during which such failure continues, subject to a maximum of 10
five lakh rupees” shall be substituted.
Amendment of 101. In section 454 of the principal Act,—
section 454.
(a) in sub-section (1), for the word “Registrar,” the words “Assistant
Registrar” shall be substituted;
(b) after sub-section (1), the following sub-section shall be inserted, 15
namely:—
“(1A) A company or its officer who is in default, may make an
application in such form and manner and on payment of such fees, as
may be prescribed under this section for adjudication of penalty.”;
(c) in sub-section (5),— 20
(i) after the words “Regional Director having jurisdiction in the
matter”, the words “or to such Appellate Authority, as the Central
Government may, by notification, specify” shall be inserted;
(ii) the following proviso shall be inserted, namely:—
“Provided that the Appellate Authority shall not be below the 25
rank of Joint Director.”;
(d) in sub-section (7), after the words “Regional Director”, the words,
brackets and figure “or the Appellate Authority referred to in sub-section (5)”
shall be inserted;
(e) in sub-section (8),–– 30
(i) in clause (i), after the words “five lakh rupees”, the words “by
a Court and the said Court shall also have the power to direct such
company to pay the amount of penalty imposed by the said order” shall
be inserted;
(ii) in clause (ii), after the words “or with both”, the words “by a 35
Court and the said Court shall also have the power to direct such officer
or the other person to pay the amount of penalty imposed by the said
order” shall be inserted;
(f) after sub-section (8), the following sub-sections shall be inserted,
40
namely:—
“(9) The penalties realised under this section shall be credited to
the Consolidated Fund of India.
39
(10) On and from the commencement of the Corporate Laws
(Amendment) Act, 2026, where a provision in respect of any offence
provided in this Act has been amended to provide for adjudication under
this section,––
(a) the manner of withdrawal of the complaint; and
5
(b) the manner of transfer of such matter for adjudication
under this section,
in respect of such offence, whether pending in the Court or otherwise,
10
s
G
h
o
a
v
ll
e r
b
n
e
m
d
en
ea
t
l
m
t
a
w
y
i t
n
h
o t
i
i
n
fy
a
i
c
n
c
t
o
h
r
i
d
s
a
b
n
e
c
h
e
a l
w
f.
i
”
t
.
h such Scheme as the Central
102. In section 454A of the principal Act, after the words “Regional Director”, Amendment of
the words, brackets and figures “or the Appellate Authority referred to in s e c t i o n 4 54A.
sub-section (5) of section 454” shall be inserted.
103. After section 454A of the principal Act, the following sections shall be Insertion of new
15 inserted, namely:— sections 454B,
454C and 454D.
‘454B. (1) If a person fails to pay the penalty imposed under this Act, Recovery of
the Recovery Officer may draw up under his signature a statement (herein amounts.
referred to as certificate) in the specified form specifying the amount due from
the person and shall proceed to recover from such person the amount specified
20 in the certificate by one or more of the following modes, namely:—
(a) attachment and sale of movable property of such person;
(b) attachment of bank accounts of such person;
(c) attachment and sale of immovable properties of such person;
(d) arrest of that person and his detention in prison;
(e) appointing a receiver for the management of such movable or
25
immovable properties,
and for this purpose, the provisions of sections 220 to 227, 228A, 229, 232,
the Second Schedule and Third Schedule to the Income-tax Act, 1961 and the
43 of 1961.
Income-tax (Certificate Proceedings) Rules, 1962, as in force from time to
30 time, in so far as may be, apply with necessary modifications as if the
corresponding provisions of the said Act and the rules made thereunder were
the provisions of this Act and referred to the amount due under this Act,
instead of to income-tax under the Income-tax Act, 1961.
Explanation 1.—For the purposes of this sub-section, the movable or
35 immovable property or monies held in bank accounts of the person, shall
include any property or monies held in bank accounts which has been
transferred directly or indirectly on or after the date when the amount specified
in the certificate had become due, by the person to his spouse or his minor
child or son’s wife or son’s minor child, otherwise than for adequate
40 consideration, and which is held by, or stands in the name of, any of his
relations aforementioned; and so far as the movable or immovable property or
monies held in bank accounts so transferred to his minor child or his son’s
minor child is concerned, it shall, even after the date of attainment of majority
by such minor child or son’s minor child, as the case may be, continue to be
45 included in the movable or immovable property or monies held in bank
accounts of such person for recovering any amount due from him under
this Act.
40
Explanation 2.—Any reference under the provisions of the Second
Schedule or the Third Schedule to the Income-tax Act, 1961 and the 4 3 o f 1 9 6 1 .
Income-tax (Certificate Proceedings) Rules, 1962 to the assessee, shall be
construed as a reference to the person specified in the certificate.
Explanation 3.—Any reference to an appeal under Chapter XVIID and 5
the Second Schedule to the Income-tax Act, 1961, shall be construed as a 43 of 1961.
reference to an appeal before the Appellate Authority under sub-section (5)
of section 454 of this Act.
Explanation 4.—The interest referred to in section 220 of the
Income-tax Act, 1961 shall commence from the date the amount became 10 43 of 1961.
payable by the person.
(2) The Recovery Officer shall have power to seek the assistance of the
local district administration while exercising the powers under sub-section (1).
Explanation.—For the purposes of this section, the expression
“Recovery Officer” means an officer not below the rank of Assistant Registrar 15
or Assistant Director authorised by the Central Government in this behalf, by
general or special order in writing, to exercise the powers of a Recovery
Officer.
Settlement.
454C. (1) The contraventions which shall be liable for penalty under this
Act may, subject to the provisions of this section, eligible for settlement. 20
(2) The Central Government may constitute a Specified Authority
comprising of an officer or group of officers of the Central Government which
may discharge the functions of Specified Authority under this section.
(3) Any person, against whom any proceeding has been initiated for
contravention of any provision referred to in sub-section (1), may file an 25
application in writing to the Specified Authority in such form and manner, as
may be prescribed.
(4) An application under sub-section (3) may be submitted at any time
before the order of penalty is passed.
(5) The Specified Authority may, after taking into consideration the 30
nature, gravity and impact of contraventions, agree to the proposal for
settlement, on payment of such sum by the applicant or on such other terms
and manner of implementation of settlement and monitoring, as may be
prescribed.
(6) If the Specified Authority is of the opinion that the settlement offered 35
is not appropriate in the circumstances, or if the Specified Authority and
applicant concerned do not reach an agreement on the terms of the settlement
within such time as may be prescribed, it shall by an order reject the
application for settlement and the proceedings initiated against the applicant
40
shall be continued.
(7) The settlement proceedings under this section shall be conducted in
such manner as may be prescribed.
(8) No appeal shall lie against any order passed by the Specified
Authority under this section.
(9) All settlement amounts realised under this Act shall be credited to 45
the Consolidated Fund of India.
454D. No appeal by a person, who is required to pay any amount in terms
Deposit of
certain amount of an order of––
before appeal is
(a) the National Financial Reporting Authority under section 132; or
entertained.
(b) the Valuation Authority under section 247; or 50
41
(c) the adjudicating officer under section 454,
shall be entertained by the Appellate Tribunal or Regional Director or the
Appellate Authority referred to in sub-section (5) of section 454, as the case
may be, unless the appellant has deposited ten per cent. of that amount in the
5 manner as directed by the Appellate Tribunal or Regional Director or the
Appellate Authority, as the case may be.’.
Amendment of
104. In section 455 of the principal Act,—
section 455.
(a) in sub-section (1), for the words “or an inactive company may”, the
words “or an inactive company shall” shall be substituted;
10 (b) in the Explanation below sub-section (1),––
(i) in clause (i)––
(A) for the words “financial statements and”, the words
“financial statements or” shall be substituted;
(B) for the word “last” occurring at both the places, the word
15 “preceding” shall be substituted;
(ii) in clause (ii),––
(A) in sub-clause (c), the word “and” shall be omitted;
(B) in sub-clause (d), for the word “record.”, the words
“record; and” shall be substituted;
20 (C) after sub-clause (d), the following sub-clause shall be
inserted, namely:––
“(e) receipt or payment not relatable to the business or
operations of the company.”.
105. In section 457 of the principal Act, in clause (a), after the word and Amendment of
25 figures “section 210”, the words and figures “or section 212” shall be inserted.
section 457.
106. After section 466 of the principal Act, the following section shall be Insertion of new
inserted, namely:–– section 466A.
“466A. The Central Government may issue directions or guidelines or Central
circulars, subject to such conditions, as may be necessary, for the following Government to
issue directions,
30 purposes, namely:—
guidelines or
circulars.
(a) clarifying the meaning or intent of any rule; and
(b) laying down any procedural requirement ancillary to any rule:
Provided that the Central Government shall hold consultation with
expert bodies or individuals in such manner, as may be prescribed, before
35 issuing directions or guidelines or circulars, under this section:
Provided further that where the Central Government is of the opinion
that it is necessary or expedient in the public interest that certain directions or
guidelines or circulars are required to be made urgently for the purposes of
effective implementation of the concerned rule, it may issue such directions
40 or guidelines or circulars, without consulting the expert bodies or individuals
and record the reasons for doing so in writing.
Explanation.—The directions or guidelines or circulars issued under this
section shall be in addition to and not in derogation of any rule made under
section 469 and in case of any conflict, the rule shall prevail.”.
42
Amendment of 107. In section 469 of the principal Act, for sub-section (3), the following
section 469. sub-section shall be substituted, namely:—
“(3) Any rule made under sub-section (1) may provide that in case of
contravention thereof, the company, every officer of the company who is in
default or any other person, shall be liable to a penalty of an amount, as may 5
be prescribed, which shall not be more than five lakh rupees, and in case of
continuing default, with a further penalty of such amount, as may be
prescribed, which shall not be more than five thousand rupees for every day
during which such default continues.”.
STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
The Companies Act, 2013 (the Companies Act) was enacted to consolidate
and amend the laws relating to companies. The said Act introduced significant
changes related to disclosures to stakeholders, accountability of directors, auditors
and key managerial personnel, investor protection and corporate governance. The
said Act was earlier amended in 2015, 2017, 2019 and 2020 to decriminalise certain
offences, facilitate ease of doing business, rationalise compliance requirements and
recognise new concepts.
2.The Limited Liability Partnership Act, 2008 (the LLP Act) was enacted to
make provisions for the formation and regulation of limited liability partnerships
and for matters connected therewith or incidental thereto. It aims to facilitate doing
business in the form of an LLP which has the flexibility of a partnership firm but is
constituted in the form of a body corporate structure with limited liability and
perpetual succession. The LLP Act was amended in the year 2021 to facilitate ease
of doing business and to decriminalise certain offences.
3.In continuation of the Government’s constant endeavour to facilitate greater
ease of doing business for corporates, the Company Law Committee (CLC)
constituted by the Government submitted its last report in March, 2022. On the basis
of the said report, consultations made with various stakeholders and the
recommendations of the High Level Committee on Non-Financial Regulatory
Reforms [HLC-NFRR], it is proposed to amend the Companies Act and the
LLP Act. The proposed amendments are broadly aimed at––
(i) promoting further ease of doing business and ease of living for corporates
by decriminalising more provisions and amending certain other provisions;
(ii) providing ease of compliance for One Person Companies, small
companies, start-up companies and producer companies;
(iii)streamlining existing regulatory practices to strengthen and improve
the operational efficiency of the said enactments;
(iv) recognising new concepts in light of rapidly evolving corporate
landscape and changing business practices; and
(v) carrying out drafting and clarificatory changes to remove
ambiguities.
4.Accordingly, it is proposed to introduce the Corporate Laws (Amendment)
Bill, 2026, which, inter alia, provides for—
(a) decriminalisation of various procedural defaults under the
Companies Act and the LLP Act by replacing criminal provisions with civil
penalties;
(b)simplification of procedures relating to mergers and amalgamations
through rationalisation of approval thresholds for fast-track mergers and
enabling filing of applications before a single bench of the National Company
Law Tribunal having jurisdiction over the transferee company;
(c) providing further relaxations for small companies by providing
exemption from mandatory Corporate Social Responsibility (CSR),
requirements related to auditor appointment for prescribed class of small
companies, reduction in additional fees, etc.;
(d) simplification of procedures relating to voluntary strike-off of
companies to facilitate quicker and simpler closure or voluntary exit for
companies;
43
44
(e) relaxations in CSR requirements through revision of eligibility
thresholds and enhancing timelines for transfer of unspent amounts to a
separate bank account relating to ongoing project and revising eligibility
threshold with regard to constitution of CSR committees;
(f) facilitating companies and limited liability partnerships operating in
International Financial Services Centres by allowing them to issue and
maintain share capital in foreign currency as permitted by the International
Financial Services Centres Authority;
(g) enabling companies to hold Annual General Meetings and
Extraordinary General Meetings through video conferencing or other audio
visual means with requirement for holding at least one Annual General
Meeting in physical mode within a specified period;
(h) replacement of certain affidavits required under the Act with
self-declarations;
(i) enabling multi-disciplinary partnerships for cost auditors and
secretarial auditors in a similar manner as provided for financial auditors;
(j) enhancing monetary thresholds of fines for compounding of offences
by Regional Directors so as to reduce the burden on the National Company
Law Tribunal;
(k) making third party professional certification at the time of
incorporation optional;
(l) flexibility in buy-back of shares for prescribed classes of companies;
(m) rationalisation of provisions relating to producer companies;
(n) easing compliances for Alternative Investment Funds which are
formed as limited liability partnerships;
(o) strengthening the role of the National Financial Reporting Authority;
(p) enabling constitution of special benches of the National Company
Law Tribunal to hear specific matters under the Companies Act and the
Insolvency and Bankruptcy Code, 2016;
(q) enabling conversion of specified non-trading entities registered with
State Governments into section 8 companies;
(r) clarification that compromise or arrangement under the Companies
Act shall not be allowed, where process of liquidation has commenced under
the Insolvency and Bankruptcy Code, 2016;
(s) recognising new forms of instruments linked to the value of share
capital for executive compensation;
(t) clarification that a trust shall be registered as a beneficial owner and
trustee shall be registered as a member in the register of members of a
company; and
(u) further consequential amendments relating thereto.
5. The notes on clauses explain, in detail, the provisions of the Bill.
6. The Bill seeks to achieve the above objectives.
NEW DELHI; NIRMALA SITHARAMAN.
The 18th March, 2026.
Notes on clauses
Clause 2 of the Bill seeks to amend sub-section (1) of section 2 of the Limited
Liability Partnership Act, 2008 (hereinafter referred to as the LLP Act, 2008) by
inserting new definitions for the terms “International Financial Services Centre”,
“International Financial Services Centres Authority”, “permitted foreign currency”
and “Specified International Financial Services Centre LLP” in the LLP Act, 2008.
Clause 3 of the Bill seeks to amend clause (c) and insert new clause (d) in
sub-section (1) of section 11 of the LLP Act, 2008 to provide that the requirement
of declaration by an advocate, chartered accountant, cost accountant or company
secretary in practice during formation or incorporation of an LLP shall be applicable
only when the LLP engages such professionals in its formation or incorporation. It
further seeks to insert new proviso in clause (c) of sub-section (2) to enable a
Specified International Financial Services Centre (Specified IFSC) LLP to
undertake financial services activities as permitted under International Financial
Services Centres Authority Act, 2019.
Clause 4 of the Bill seeks to insert a new proviso in sub-section (1) of
section 13 of the LLP Act, 2008 to provide that a Specified International Financial
Services Centre LLP shall have its registered office at all times within an
International Financial Services Centre.
Clause 5 of the Bill seeks to insert a new proviso in sub-section (1) of
section 15 of the LLP Act, 2008 to require that a Specified International Financial
Services Centre LLP shall include the suffix “International Financial Services
Centre LLP” as part of its name.
Clause 6 of the Bill seeks to insert a new proviso to sub-section (2) of
section 23 of the LLP Act, 2008 so as to provide that in case of prescribed class or
classes of LLPs regulated by the Securities and Exchange Board of India (SEBI), or
by the International Financial Services Centres Authority (IFSCA), as the case may
be, the requirement of filing any changes in the LLP agreement shall be such as may
be provided by rules. This amendment is to facilitate setting up of Alternative
Investment Funds in LLP form.
Clause 7 of the Bill seeks to insert a new proviso to sub-section (2) of
section 25 of the LLP Act, 2008 so as to provide that in case of prescribed class or
classes of LLPs regulated by SEBI or by the IFSCA, the requirement to furnish
details of changes in partners to the Registrar shall be on annual basis in such form
and manner as may be provided by rules. This amendment is to facilitate setting up
of Alternative Investment Funds in LLP form.
Clause 8 of the Bill seeks to insert new provisos in sub-section (2) of
section 32 of the LLP Act, 2008 to provide that the monetary value of each partner’s
contribution in a Specified International Financial Services Centre (IFSC) LLP shall
be accounted for and disclosed in a permitted foreign currency. It further provides
for the period and manner in which an LLP set up in IFSC prior to Corporate Laws
(Amendment) Act, 2026 (CLAA-2026) may convert monetary value of contribution
of each partner to permitted foreign currency. It further provides that an LLP
referred to in the first proviso shall not be permitted to receive or accept monetary
contribution from any partner, without converting its monetary contribution into a
permitted foreign currency, after such commencement.
Clause 9 of the Bill seeks to insert a new section 33A in the LLP Act, 2008 to
provide that the provisions of section 247 of the Companies Act, 2013 shall mutatis
mutandis apply for the valuation required in respect of a partner’s contribution in an
LLP or of any property or assets or net worth of such limited liability partnership,
or its liabilities under the provisions of LLP Act or rules made thereunder.
45
46
Clause 10 of the Bill seeks to insert new provisos in sub-section (1) of
section 34 of the LLP Act, 2008 to provide that a Specified IFSC LLP maintaining
contribution in a permitted foreign currency shall prepare and maintain its books of
account, books and papers, financial statements and all other records in the
permitted foreign currency. It also provides that such IFSC LLP may be permitted
to prepare its books of account, books and papers, financial statement and other
records in Indian rupee, if so, allowed by the International Financial Services
Centres Authority (IFSCA). It also proposes to decriminalise offences under
sub-sections (1) and (2) of the said section.
Clause 11 of the Bill seeks to insert new sub-section (4) in section 38 of the
LLP Act, 2008 to provide that any person who, without lawful excuse, fails to
comply with any requisition of the Registrar (other than summons) issued under this
section shall be liable to penalty of ten thousand rupees. Accordingly, this aspect of
offence is being decriminalised.
Clause 12 of the Bill seeks to insert new section 57A in the LLP Act, 2008 to
allow conversion of a specified trust into a limited liability partnership in accordance
with the provisions of Chapter X and the proposed Fifth Schedule in the said Act. It
also seeks to insert an Explanation to the new section to clarify that, for the purposes
of the section, the term “specified trust” means a trust established under the Indian
Trusts Act, 1882 or under a Central Act or State Act, and registered by SEBI or by the
IFSCA, having such activities as may be provided by rules. This amendment will
facilitate conversion of Alternative Investment Funds formed as trusts into LLPs.
Clause 13 of the Bill seeks to replace section 58 of the LLP Act, 2008 so as to
include enabling provisions for the registration and legal effect of conversion of a
specified trust into limited liability partnership also, in addition to firm, private
company and unlisted public company already allowed in existing section 58. This
amendment will facilitate conversion of Alternative Investment Funds formed as
trusts into LLPs.
Clause 14 of the Bill seeks to insert two new provisos in sub-section (1) of
section 68 of the LLP Act, 2008 to provide that Central Government may require a
Specified IFSC LLP to use permitted foreign currency for the purpose of filing,
recording, or registering any document under the said section in the manner as may be
provided by rules. It also seeks to provide that such IFSC LLP shall pay fees, fines and
penalties as provided under the LLP Act or the rules made thereunder in Indian rupees.
Clause 15 of the Bill seeks to insert a new section 68B in the LLP Act, 2008 to
provide that any person aggrieved by the decision of the Registrar under section 12 or
section 16 of the said Act may prefer an appeal to such officer of the Central Government,
in such form and manner and within such period as may be provided by rules.
Clause 16 of the Bill seeks to insert a new sub-section (1A) in section 76A of
the LLP Act, 2008 to provide that a LLP or its partner or designated partner may,
suo moto, make an application for adjudication of penalty in such form and manner
and on payment of such fees, as may be provided by rules. It also seeks to insert a
new sub-section (10) to provide that from the commencement of the proposed
legislation, where a provision in respect of any offence provided in LLP Act has
been amended to provide for adjudication under the said section, the manner of
withdrawal of the complaint and the manner of transfer of such matter for adjudication
under such section, whether pending in the Court or otherwise, shall be dealt with in
accordance with such Scheme as may be notified by the Central Government.
Clause 17 of the Bill seeks to insert a new Schedule (Fifth Schedule) to the
LLP Act, 2008 referred to in section 57A to specify the conditions which would
need to be fulfilled before conversion of a specified trust into a limited liability
partnership. The provisions of Fifth Schedule are similar to conditions provided
under Second, Third and Fourth Schedules to the Act. This amendment will
facilitate conversion of Alternative Investment Funds formed as trusts into LLPs.
47
Clause 18 of the Bill seeks to make amendment in section 2 of the Companies
Act, 2013 (Companies Act) which defines various terms used in the said Act. It
seeks to modify clause (28) to substitute reference to the appropriate title of “The
Cost Accountants Act, 1959”. It seeks to insert new proviso to clause (41) for
empowering the Central Government to allow conversion of the financial year to
the period ending on 31st March of the following year, on application by a company
or a body corporate, referred to under the first proviso, or on the basis of commercial
considerations, by any other company or body corporate, as the case may be. It also
seeks to insert definition of “Regional Director” as a new clause (73A) to mean a
person appointed by the Central Government under section 396 as Regional Director
for the purposes of the Companies Act who shall include an Additional Regional
Director or Joint Regional Director, or Deputy Regional Director. It also seeks to
insert new clause (74A) to define the term “Registered Valuer” to mean a person
who holds a certificate of registration granted under section 247. The clause also seeks
to amend sub-clauses (i) and (ii) of clause (85) to expand the definition of small
companies by increasing the existing upper limit of paid-up share capital to twenty
crore rupees and existing upper limit of turnover to two hundred crore rupees.
Clause 19 of the Bill seeks to amend sub-clause (a) of clause (ii) of
sub-section (5) of section 4 of the Companies Act to provide for a fixed penalty
amount of fifty thousand rupees where companies default in compliance with such
provisions.
Clause 20 of the Bill seeks to amend clause (b) and insert new clause (ba) in
sub-section (1) of section 7 of the Companies Act to provide that the requirement of
declaration by an advocate, chartered accountant, cost accountant or company
secretary in practice during formation or incorporation of a company shall be
applicable only when the company engages such professionals in its formation or
incorporation.
Clause 21 of the Bill seeks to insert a new section 12A in the Companies Act
to provide that the prescribed class or classes of companies shall maintain a website,
an email address and other modes of communication in such form and manner as
may be provided by rules. It further provides that the details of website, e-mail
address and other modes of communication, and the changes therein shall be
intimated to the Registrar in such form and within such period as may be provided
by rules. The clause is sought to be made applicable to listed companies or other
unlisted public companies meeting relevant thresholds to be provided by rules.
Clause 22 of the Bill seeks to insert a proviso after sub-section (2) of
section 20 of the Companies Act to provide that service of prescribed class of
documents by prescribed class or classes of companies to their members shall take
place only through electronic mode in such manner as may be provided by rules.
Since electronic communication is cost-effective and convenient mode for
dispatching and delivering documents the proposed amendments seeks to allow
communication in such form. The manner in which members would be entitled to
receive physical copies of the prescribed classes of documents would be provided
in the rules. In the second proviso, it is proposed to replace the words “annual
general meeting”, with the words “general meeting” to allow determination of fees
for delivery of any document to a member through a particular mode in the
extraordinary general meetings also.
Clause 23 of the Bill seeks to amend sub-section (2) of section 24 of the
Companies Act, to omit the words “and the matters delegated to it under proviso to
sub-section (1) of section 458”. The proviso to sub-section (1) in section 458 referring
to delegation of powers under sections 194 and 195 to the Securities and Exchange
Board of India, as well as, sections 194 and 195 of the Companies Act were omitted
in 2017. The reference to such proviso to sub-section (1) of section 458 in
sub-section (2) of section 24, accordingly, is redundant and being omitted.
48
Clause 24 of the Bill seeks to substitute sub-section (9) of section 26 of the
Companies Act, to provide that if a prospectus is issued in contravention of such
section, the company and every person who is knowingly a party to the issue of such
prospectus shall be liable to a penalty of two lakh rupees. Accordingly, the offence
is being decriminalised.
Clause 25 of the Bill seeks to amend sub-section (5) of section 40 of the
Companies Act, to provide that punishment under such sub-section shall be applicable
only for defaults under sub-section (3) thereby decriminalising offences under
sub-sections (1), (2) and (4) of section 40. It further seeks to insert new sub-section (5A)
to provide that in case of defaults (under sub-sections other than sub-section (3), penalty
of twenty-five lakh rupees for every company and two lakh rupees for every officer of
the company shall be leviable.
Clause 26 of the Bill seeks to amend the marginal heading of section 42 of the
Companies Act by substituting the word “shares” with the word “securities”. It
further seeks to amend sub-section (2) to insert the words “or such other scheme
linked to the value of the share capital of a company”, after the words, “employee
stock option”, in order to recognise instruments such as Restricted Stock Units and
Stock Appreciation Rights, in addition to Employee Stock Option Plans, as
executive compensation to be issued with approval of shareholders. It also seeks to
amend sub-section (10) to replace the words “which may extend to”, with the words
“equivalent to” to bring in more transparency in levy of penalties.
Clause 27 of the Bill seeks to insert new section 43A in the Companies Act to
provide for the requirements in respect of issue and maintenance of share capital,
preparation and maintenance of books of account, etc., filing, submitting or
delivering documents by companies set up and incorporated in the IFSC jurisdiction
in a permitted foreign currency. Presently, the Companies Act does not include
specific provisions to enable companies to prepare accounts or financial statements
in foreign currencies. Taking into account the nature of companies set up in IFSC
jurisdiction, such provisions are being included through new section 43A. It also
seeks to clarify that such companies shall pay fees, fines and penalties under the
Companies Act and the rules made thereunder in Indian rupees.
Clause 28 of the Bill seeks to amend clause (b) of sub-section (1) of section 62 of
the Companies Act to include the words “or under such other scheme linked to the value
of the share capital of the company”, after the words “under a scheme of employees’
stock option”, in order to recognise instruments such as Restricted Stock Units and Stock
Appreciation Rights, in addition to Employee Stock Option Plans, as executive
compensation to be issued with approval of shareholders.
Clause 29 of the Bill seeks to replace existing proviso with two new provisos in
clause (c) of sub-section (2) of section 68 of the Companies Act to provide that
prescribed class or classes of companies may buy-back shares up to such per cent. of the
aggregate of paid-up capital and free reserves as may be provided by rules. It also seeks
to insert a proviso to clause (g) of sub-section (2) thereto to allow prescribed class or
classes of companies to make up to two offers of buy-backs within a period of year in
such a manner that the second buy-back during the year is not made earlier than six
months from the date of closure of the preceding offer for buy-back during the year.
Further, it seeks to amend clause (c) of sub-section (5) of section 68 of the Companies
Act, 2013 to include the words “or a scheme linked to the value of the share capital of a
company referred to in clause (b) of sub-section (1) of section 62” after the words “sweat
equity”. Buy-back through tender offers is an efficient way of returning surplus funds to
shareholders and it is proposed to allow prescribed class of companies to avail such
mechanism. Further it is proposed that companies which are debt free can be considered
to undertake more than one buy-back in a financial year. It also seeks to omit words
“and verified by an affidavit” in sub-section (6) so that declaration of solvency to be
49
filed for the purposes need not be in the form of an affidavit. The punishment of fine
provided under sub-section (11) is proposed to be converted into penalties as the offence
is being decriminalised.
Clause 30 of the Bill seeks to insert proviso in sub-section (1) of section 77 of
the Companies Act to provide that for prescribed class or classes of companies (such
as, small companies) the period of “sixty days” referred to in clause (b) of second
proviso shall be replaced with “one hundred and twenty days” so that such class or
classes of companies get 60 additional days for filing e-forms relating to the
registration of charges, in the interest of ease of compliances.
Clause 31 of the Bill seeks to insert a new sub-section (2A) in section 88 of
the Companies Act to provide that no notice of any trust, whether express, implied,
or constructive, shall be entered in the register of members or debenture holders as
maintained under sub-section (1) of the said section.
Clause 32 of the Bill seeks to insert a new sub-section (3) in section 96 of the
Companies Act to allow companies to hold their annual general meetings (AGMs)
physically or through video conferencing or other audio-visual means, either wholly
or partly, in such manner and subject to such terms and conditions, as may be
provided by rules. It also seeks to provide that if the number of members referred to
in sub-section (2) of section 100 of the Companies Act requisition the meeting to be
held in a hybrid mode, the company shall hold the meeting in such mode. It further
seeks to provide that every company shall hold its annual general meeting in
physical mode at least once in every three years.
Clause 33 of the Bill seeks to amend the marginal heading of section 99 of the
Companies Act to clarify that such section shall provide for penalty in respect of
default in complying with section 96 of the Companies Act. The clause also seeks
to omit the words and figures “or section 97 or section 98 or in complying with any
directions of the Tribunal” appearing in such section. Section 425 of the Act relating
to power to punish for contempt shall be applicable in case of non-compliance of
directions of Tribunal under sections 97 and 98. It also seeks to provide that in case
of default in complying with section 96, penalty as provided in the amended
provision shall be leviable thereby decriminalising the offence.
Clause 34 of the Bill seeks to insert a new sub-section (7) in section 100 of
the Companies Act to allow companies to hold their extraordinary general meetings
(EGMs) physically or through video conferencing or other audio-visual means,
either wholly or partly, in such manner and subject to such terms and conditions, as
may be provided by rules. It seeks to provide that if the number of members referred
to in sub-section (2) of section 100 of the Companies Act requisition the meeting to
be held in a hybrid mode, the company shall hold the meeting in such mode.
Clause 35 of the Bill seeks to amend the proviso to sub-section (1) of
section 101 of the Companies Act to provide that EGMs conducted wholly through
video conferencing or audio-visual means under sub-section (7) of section 100 may
be called by giving a notice of at least seven days, or such other period, and in such
manner as may be provided by rules.
Clause 36 of the Bill seeks to amend sub-section (5) of section 124 of the
Companies Act to provide that “any dividend which has not been paid or claimed”
shall also be transferred to Investor Education and Protection Fund (IEPF) in cases
where relevant shares have been transferred by the company under sub-section (6)
of the said section to such Fund. It also seeks to amend sub-section (6) thereof, to
insert the word “Authority” after the words “Investor Education and Protection
Fund” appearing in the said sub-section.
Clause 37 of the Bill seeks to insert a new clause (ma) in sub-section (2) of
section 125 of the Companies Act to provide that the amounts in respect of shares
bought back and extinguished, remaining unpaid or unclaimed for seven or more
50
years shall be credited to the IEPF. It further seeks to substitute clause (a) of
sub-section (3) of the said section, to provide that the IEPF shall be utilised for the refund
in respect of unclaimed dividends and amounts referred to in clauses (h) to (n) of
sub-section (2) of the said section which is due for refund. It also seeks to amend
sub-section (4) to provide that any person claiming to be entitled to the amount under
sub-section (2) may apply in accordance with such procedure and on submission of such
documents as may be provided by rules. It also seeks to insert a new sub-section (12)
to empower the IEPF Authority to delegate to any member, officer or any other person
any of its powers and functions under the Companies Act, as it deems necessary.
Clause 38 of the Bill seeks to amend sub-section (6) of section 128 of the
Companies Act to provide that in case of contravention of such section [except
sub-section (1) or sub-section (5)] the managing director, the whole-time director in
charge of finance, the Chief Financial Officer, or any other person of a company
charged by the Board with the duty of complying with the provisions of this section,
shall be liable to a penalty of five lakh rupees in case of a listed company and fifty
thousand rupees in case of any other company. It further seeks to insert a proviso to
sub-section (6) to provide that in case of contravention relating to sub-section (1) or
sub-section (5) the above persons shall be liable to a penalty of twenty lakh rupees
in case of a listed company and five lakh rupees in case of any other company.
Accordingly, the clause seeks to decriminalise offences under this section.
Clause 39 of the Bill seeks to amend long line in clause (b) of sub-section (1)
of section 131 of the Companies Act by inserting the word “immediately” before
the words “preceding financial years”.
Clause 40 of the Bill seeks to substitute sub-section (1A) of section 132 of the
Companies Act to provide that the National Financial Reporting Authority (NFRA)
shall be a body corporate, having perpetual succession and a common seal with
powers to acquire, hold and dispose of property and to contract, and to sue or be
sued in its own name. It further seeks to amend clause (a) of sub-section (2) to insert
the words “or bodies corporate”, after the words “class of companies” to enable the
authority to make recommendations for relevant bodies corporate also. It seeks to
omit sub-section (3A). It also seeks to insert sub-section (3C) to provide that the
Chairperson shall have the powers of general superintendence and direction of the
affairs of the NFRA and may exercise all powers and do the acts delegated to him
by the executive body. It seeks to insert sub-section (3D) to provide that the
executive body may, by order, delegate to the Chairperson, or any full-time Member
or officer of the NFRA, or to a Committee comprising of one or more of the above,
subject to such conditions, such powers of the executive body under this Act as it
may deem necessary. It also seeks to amend clause (a) of sub-section (4) to clarify
that class of companies or bodies corporate which may be investigated under such
provisions shall be prescribed by the Central Government and the manner of
investigation shall be specified by regulations by the Authority. It also seeks to insert
sub-clauses (C), (D), and (E) in clause (c) to sub-section (4) to provide NFRA with
the powers for issuing an advisory, censure or warning to the member or the firm,
requiring additional professional training of the member or individual partners or
employees of the firm, and referring the matter to the Central Government for taking
action under the provisions of the Companies Act or rules made thereunder. It also
seeks to substitute the Explanation to sub-section (4) provide that “professional or
other misconduct” shall also include acts or omissions that constitute a
contravention of the provisions of the Companies Act or the rules or regulations
made thereunder, insofar as they related to the matters within the jurisdiction,
functions, or regulatory remit of the NFRA. It also seeks to insert sub-section (4A)
to provide that any person who fails to comply with any order of the NFRA under
sub-section (4), or fails to pay the penalty imposed shall be liable to punishment
with imprisonment, fine and further period of debarment. It also seeks to amend
51
sub-section (11) to provide that NFRA may appoint a secretary and such other
employees as it considers necessary for the efficient performance of its functions
under this Act and the terms and conditions thereof may be specified by regulations
by NFRA. It also seeks to insert sub-section (16) to provide that no act or proceeding
of the NFRA shall be invalid due to reasons of vacancy or defect in constitution of
such Authority, any defect in appointing members of such Authority, or
irregularities in the procedure of such Authority not affecting the merits of the case.
It also seeks to insert sub-section (17) to provide that NFRA may engage experts
and professionals with special knowledge of accounting standards, auditing
standards, economics, law, business, or such other disciplines related to its functions
as it may deem necessary to assist the said Authority in discharge of its functions.
Clause 41 of the Bill seeks to insert new sections 132A to 132K in the
Companies Act relating to NFRA. It seeks to insert section 132A to provide for the
intimation of registration details of auditors, and the filing of returns with NFRA. It
further seeks to insert new section 132B to provide for the constitution of the NFRA
Fund. It also seeks to insert a new section 132C to give the National Financial
Reporting Authority the power to issue directions in public interest or interest of
investors or creditors or other persons concerned. It also seeks to insert section 132D
to empower NFRA to impose penalties after holding inquiry in such manner as may
be provided by the rules after giving a reasonable opportunity of being heard. It also
seeks to insert section 132E to provide that no civil court shall have jurisdiction to
entertain any suit or proceeding in respect of any matter which the NFRA is
empowered to determine, and no injunction shall be granted by any court or other
authority in respect of any action taken or to be taken by the said Authority in
pursuance of any power conferred by or under the Companies Act. It also seeks to
insert a new section 132F to provide that no suit, prosecution or other legal proceeding
shall lie against the Central Government or the National Financial Reporting Authority
or Chairperson or any member or officer or other employee of the said Authority for
anything done in good faith, or intended to be done under the Companies Act or the
rules or regulations made thereunder. It also seeks to insert a new section 132G to
empower the Central Government to give directions on questions of policy, in writing,
to the NFRA in certain cases. It also seeks to insert section 132H to provide for the
circumstances and other requirements in respect of supersession of the NFRA. It also
seeks to insert a new section 132-I to empower NFRA to levy fees or other charges as
may be specified. It also seeks to insert a new section 132J to empower NFRA to make
regulations. It also seeks to insert a new section 132K to provide the manner in which
NFRA shall ensure transparency while specifying regulations.
Clause 42 of the Bill seeks to insert clause (fa) in sub-section (3) of
section 134 of the Companies Act to provide that report of Board shall include
explanations or comments by the Board on every observation or comment of the
auditors on financial transactions or matters which have any adverse effect on the
functioning of the company and any qualification, reservation or adverse remark
relating to the maintenance of accounts and other matters connected therewith in
such form as may be provided by rules. It also seeks to insert clause (pa) to provide
that Board’s report shall include details in respect of composition of the Audit
Committee and where the Board had not accepted any recommendation of the Audit
Committee, a statement along with the reasons for the same.
Clause 43 of the Bill seeks to amend sub-section (1) of section 135 of the
Companies Act to substitute the words “five crore” with the words “ten crore, or
such sum as may be prescribed”. This is aimed at enhancing the applicability
threshold under sub-section (1) of the said section relating to net profit. It seeks to
replace the period of “thirty days” in sub-section (6) to “ninety days” to enable
additional time period for transfer of unspent Corporate Social Responsibility (CSR)
amounts relating to ongoing projects to the Unspent Corporate Social Responsibility
Account with the scheduled bank. It also seeks to amend sub-section (9) to replace
the words “fifty lakh rupees” to “one crore rupees or such higher amount as may be
52
prescribed” to ensure that companies having CSR amount up to one crore rupees (or
higher amount) need not constitute the Corporate Social Responsibility Committee.
It also seeks to insert a new sub-section (10) to provide that prescribed class or
classes of companies which fulfil prescribed conditions shall not be required to
comply with the said section.
Clause 44 of the Bill seeks to insert a new sub-section (12) in section 139 of
the Companies Act to provide that prescribed class or classes of companies which
fulfil such conditions, as may be provided by rules, shall not be required to appoint
auditors under Chapter X of the said Act. This amendment is aimed at facilitating
ease of compliance for small companies.
Clause 45 of the Bill seeks to insert a new proviso in sub-section (1) of
section 141 of the Companies Act to provide that every partner of the firm shall be
a person who has been registered with a statutory institute or body established under
a law in India having powers of such registration.
Clause 46 of the Bill seeks to insert new proviso to section 144 of the
Companies Act to provide that an auditor or audit firm of prescribed class or classes of
companies shall not provide, directly or indirectly, any non-audit services to the
company or its holding company or subsidiary. It also seeks to provide that the
restriction under this section shall also apply for a period of three years after the auditor
or audit firm has completed his or its term under sub-section (2) of section 139.
Clause 47 of the Bill seeks to insert a proviso after sub-section (1) of
section 147 of the Companies Act to provide that in case of contravention of
sub-sections (1), (5) to (8) and (11) of section 139, sub-section (4) of section 140,
sub-section (4) of section 141, sub-sections (1) and (2) of section 142 and
section 146 of the Companies Act, the company shall be liable to a penalty of one
lakh rupees and in case of continuing failure, with a further penalty of five hundred
rupees for each day subject to a maximum of five lakh rupees and every officer of
the company who is in default shall be liable to a penalty of twenty-five thousand
rupees and in case of continuing failure, with a further penalty of two hundred rupees
for each day subject to a maximum of one lakh rupees. The clause, accordingly,
seeks to decriminalise relevant offences. It further seeks to amend sub-section (2)
of section 147 to insert reference to “section 143 [other than sub-section (12)]”, and
“section 146” in the said sub-section.
Clause 48 of the Bill seeks to insert a new sub-section (1A) in section 148 of
the Companies Act to empower the Central Government to provide standards of cost
accounting by rules, after examination of recommendations of the Institute of Cost
Accountants of India. It further seeks to insert provisos in sub-section (3) to provide
that a firm whose majority of partners practicing in India are qualified for
appointment as cost auditor may be appointed by its firm name and to also provide
that every partner of such firm shall be a person who is registered with a statutory
institute or body established under a law in India having powers of such registration.
It also seeks to amend punishment provisions under sub-section (8) so as to provide
for payment of penalty in case of such defaults under section 148 which are of
technical or procedural nature. For contravention of serious nature the existing
punishment is being sought to be retained. Accordingly, certain offences under the
section are being decriminalised.
Clause 49 of the Bill seeks to amend sub-clauses (i) and (ii) of clause (e) of
sub-section (6) of section 149 of the Companies Act to include the words “or during
the current financial year”. It also seeks to substitute the words “secretarial auditors”
for the words “company secretaries in practice” in item (A) of sub-clause (ii) of
clause (e) of sub-section (6). It also seeks to amend item (B) in sub-clause (ii) of
clause (e) of the said sub-section to replace the words “amounting to ten per cent.
or more”, with the words “amounting to ten per cent. or such lower per cent., as may
be prescribed” so that lower per cent. may be provided by rules in future with regard
to the amounts of transactions which any legal or consulting firm may have with the
53
company or its holding, subsidiary or associate company in case any employee or
proprietor or partner of such firm is independent director in the company. It also
seeks to insert a new sub-section (6A) to provide that every independent director
shall ensure that he continues to fulfil the requirements specified under
sub-section (6) during the term of his appointment. It also seeks to amend
sub-section (11) of section 149 of the Companies Act to include reference to
“holding, subsidiary or associate company” also so that the restriction in respect of
appointment or association in any other capacity during cooling off period of three
years is applicable to the company as well as its holding, subsidiary or associate
company. It also seeks to insert new proviso in sub-section (11) to provide that
where the provisions of item (B) of sub-clause (ii) of clause (e) of sub-section (6)
applies to an independent director, he may continue as an employee or proprietor or
partner of the legal or consulting firm, in case the transaction of such legal or consulting
firm with the company, its holding or subsidiary or associate company is less than ten
per cent. or the lower per cent. referred to in the said item, of the gross turnover of such
firm. It also seeks to insert a new Explanation 2, in the said section, to provide that any
period during which an independent director has served as an additional director of the
company, shall be included in his tenure as an independent director.
Clause 50 of the Bill seeks to amend sub-section (3) of section 152 of the
Companies Act to clarify that a person needs to have a valid Director Identification
Number during the entire term of his functioning as director in any company. It
seeks to provide that after the words “shall be appointed”, in sub-section (3), the
words “or shall continue to function” shall be inserted. It also seeks to insert the
words “and the said Director Identification Number or the other number is not
deactivated or cancelled” at the end thereby providing clarity regarding the necessity
of validity of the Director Identification Number (DIN) at the time of appointment
as well as during entire tenure. The amendments seeks to ensure that only persons
holding a valid and active identification number may be appointed and may continue
to function as directors.
Clause 51 of the Bill seeks to insert new sub-sections (2) to (7) in section 154
of the Companies Act to, inter alia, provide for requirements in respect of
(i) submission of information towards verification of particulars of a person holding
a DIN to the Central Government, (ii) the circumstances under which Director
Identification Number may be deactivated or cancelled and the consequences
thereof, (iii) manner of surrendering the DIN and (iv) conditions on fulfilment of
which a DIN may be re-activated or restored.
Clause 52 of the Bill seeks to amend section 159 of the Companies Act to
replace the words “which may extend to” with the word “of” to bring in more
transparency in levy of penalties. It also proposes to include maximum penalty
amount of rupees five lakh for default in respect of this section.
Clause 53 of the Bill seeks to amend sub-section (1) of section 161 of the
Companies Act to provide that an additional director may hold office up to the date of
the next general meeting or up to a period of three months from the date of his
appointment, whichever is earlier. It further seeks to amend sub-section (4) to provide
for similar requirements in case of filing of casual vacancy of a director. It also seeks
to insert a new sub-section (5) to provide that notwithstanding anything contained in
sub-sections (1) to (4), a person whose appointment as a director could not be
considered or could not be approved in a general meeting, shall not be appointed by
the Board as an additional director, or alternate director or a director against a casual
vacancy under this section without the prior approval of its members.
Clause 54 of the Bill seeks to amend clause (g) of sub-section (1) of
section 164 of the Companies Act to cover cases where a person has been subjected
to a penalty for default under the provisions of section 188 of the said Act which
relates to related party transactions. It also seeks to insert a new clause (j) to provide
54
that a person shall not be eligible for appointment as a director of a company, if he
has been an auditor or a secretarial auditor or a cost auditor or a registered valuer or
an insolvency professional of the company or its holding, subsidiary or associate
company discharging the functions as such under this Act or under the Insolvency
and Bankruptcy Code, 2016 during the immediately preceding three financial years
or during the current financial year. It also seeks to insert a new clause (k) to provide
that a person shall not be eligible under the said section if he has not been assessed
by the Board to be a fit and proper person in accordance with such criteria, as may
be provided by rules. It also seeks to amend clause (a) of sub-section (2) to revise
the period of non-filing of financial statements or annual returns from “three financial
years” to “two financial years” so that companies are more diligent in filing such
documents within time. It also seeks to amend the long line of sub-section (2) to
clarify that where provisions of section 164(2) become applicable, the office of
director shall become vacant as per provisions of sub-section (1) of section 167.
Clause 55 of the Bill seeks to amend sub-section (1) of section 165 of the
Companies Act to empower the Central Government to specify a lower number for
the purposes of the said section for a class or classes of companies or a class or
classes of directors. It further seeks to amend Explanation II to sub-section (1) to
replace the words “of twenty companies” with the words “under this section” which
is of consequential nature.
Clause 56 of the Bill seeks to amend sub-section (7) of section 166 of the
Companies Act to provide that such sub-section relating to punishment under the
said section shall be applicable only for sub-section (5) and to further clarify that
the court adjudicating such offence may also order concerned director to pay the
amount of undue gains referred to in the said sub-section to the company. It further
seeks to insert a new sub-section (8) to provide that if a director of a company
contravenes the provisions of the said section [other than sub-section (5)] he shall
be liable to a penalty of five lakh rupees in case of a listed company and two lakh
rupees in case of any other company. The clause seeks to decriminalise offences
under section 166, except sub-section (5).
Clause 57 of the Bill seeks to substitute the proviso to clause (a) of sub-section (1)
of section 167 of the Companies Act to provide that where a director incurs
disqualification under sub-section (2) of section 164, his office shall become vacant
in every company where he is a director (including the company which is in default
under that sub-section), after six months from the date of incurring such
disqualification or upon expiry of his tenure in such company, whichever is earlier. It
further seeks to add an Explanation to clarify that the date of incurring the
disqualification shall be the date on which the company fails to comply with the
provisions of clause (a) or clause (b) of sub-section (2) of section 164. It also seeks to
amend sub-section (2) to provide that if a person functions as a director even when he
knows that the office of director held by him has become vacant on account of any of
the disqualifications specified in sub-section (1) or that his Director Identification
Number has been de-activated or cancelled, he shall be liable to a penalty of five lakh
rupees, in case of a listed company, and two lakh rupees, in case of any other company.
The clause seeks to decriminalise offences under sub-section (2) of section 167.
Clause 58 of the Bill seeks to amend sub-section (5) of section 173 of the
Companies Act to provide that a One Person Company, small company and dormant
company shall be deemed to have complied with the provisions of the said section
relating to meetings of Board of directors if at least one meeting of the Board of
Directors has been conducted in a calendar year.
Clause 59 of the Bill seeks to amend sub-section (1) of section 184 of the
Companies Act by omitting the words “at the first meeting of the Board in every
financial year or” to clarify that subsequent disclosures provided in such sub-section
would be required only when there is any change in the disclosures made and not
every financial year.
55
Clause 60 of the Bill seeks to amend clause (b) of sub-section (1) of
section 185 of the Companies Act by providing that after the words “any firm”, the
words “or limited liability partnership” shall be inserted so that limited liability
partnerships are also covered within the purview of such provisions.
Clause 61 of the Bill seeks to amend sub-section (13) of section 186 of the
Companies Act to exclude contraventions of sub-sections (9) and (10) of section 186
from the scope of punishment provided therein. It further seeks to insert a new
sub-section (14) to provide that if a company contravenes the provisions of sub-section (9)
or sub-section (10), the company shall be liable to a penalty of one lakh rupees and in
case of continuing contravention, with a further penalty of five hundred rupees for each
day, after the first during which such contravention continues, subject to a maximum of
five lakh rupees and every officer of the company who is in default shall be liable to a
penalty of twenty-five thousand rupees and in case of continuing default, with a further
penalty of two hundred rupees for each day, after the first during which such default
continues, subject to a maximum of one lakh rupees. The clause seeks to decriminalise
offences under sub-sections (9) and (10) of section 186.
Clause 62 of the Bill seeks to insert a new sub-section (5A) in section 189 of
the Companies Act to provide that every company which fails to comply with the
provisions of such section and the rules made thereunder shall be liable to a penalty
of two lakh rupees.
Clause 63 of the Bill seeks to insert a new section 203A in the Companies Act
to provide for resignation of whole-time key managerial personnel (KMP) who are
not a director in a company. Sub-section (1) of section 203A provides that a
whole-time KMP, who is not a director, may resign from his office by giving a notice
in writing to the company, and the Board shall, on receipt of such notice, take note of
the same and intimate the Registrar of such resignation in such form and manner and
within such time, as may be provided by rules. It further provides that where the
company fails to intimate, the said KMP may forward a copy of his resignation to the
Registrar in such manner as may be provided by rules. Sub-section (2) of section 203A
provides that the resignation of a KMP shall take effect from the date on which the
notice is received by the company or the date, if any, specified by him in the notice,
whichever is later. It further provides that such KMP shall be liable even after his
resignation for the default for which he was liable during his tenure.
Clause 64 of the Bill seeks to amend section 204 of the Companies Act by
substituting the words “secretarial auditors” for the words “company secretaries in
practice”, wherever they occur. It further seeks to insert a new sub-section (1A) to
provide that a person shall be eligible for appointment as a secretarial auditor of a
company only if he is a company secretary in practice, provided that that a firm,
whereof majority of partners practicing in India who are qualified for appointment,
may be appointed by its firm name. It further seeks to provide that every partner of
the firm shall be a person who has been registered with a statutory institute or body
established under a law in India having powers of such registration.
Clause 65 of the Bill seeks to substitute sub-section (7) of section 206 of the
Companies Act to provide that if a company fails to furnish any information or
explanation or produce any document required under this section, the company
shall be liable to a penalty of one lakh rupees and in case of continuing failure, with
a further penalty of five hundred rupees for each day, subject to a maximum of five
lakh rupees and every officer of the company who is in default shall be liable to a
penalty of twenty-five thousand rupees and in case of continuing failure, with a
further penalty of two hundred rupees for each day, subject to a maximum of one
lakh rupees. The clause seeks to decriminalise offences under section 206.
Clause 66 of the Bill seeks to omit offence referred to in sub-section (2) of
section 222 of the Companies Act. Section 425 of the said Act relating to power to
punish for contempt shall be applicable in such case.
56
Clause 67 of the Bill seeks to amend sub-sections (1) and (6) of section 230 of
the Companies Act by omitting the words “or under the Insolvency and Bankruptcy
Code, 2016” to clarify that a compromise or merger under the said Act is not allowed
when the liquidation process under the Insolvency and Bankruptcy Code, 2016 has
been initiated. It further seeks to insert a new proviso to sub-section (1) of section 230
to provide that on and from the commencement of the proposed legislation, every
application to be made under this section or sections 231 to 233 to the National
Company Law Tribunal (Tribunal), shall be made to the Tribunal having jurisdiction
over the transferee company or the resultant company, as the case may be, and such
Tribunal shall exercise all the powers of the Tribunal referred to in such sections for
all the companies involved in the schemes of compromise or arrangement or
amalgamations. It also seeks to provide that any application pending before the
Tribunal as on the date of such commencement shall continue to be dealt with by the
Tribunal in accordance with the provisions applicable before such commencement.
Clause 68 of the Bill seeks to amend the proviso to clause (b) of sub-section (3)
of section 232 of the Companies Act to provide that after the words “or extinguished”
occurring at the end, the words “on the merger or amalgamation” shall be inserted.
This change is of drafting nature.
Clause 69 of the Bill seeks to substitute clause (b) of sub-section (1) of section 233
of the Companies Act to provide that objections and suggestions received are considered
by the companies in their respective general meetings and the scheme is approved by a
majority of members or class of members present and voting at the meeting who hold at
least seventy-five per cent. of the value in shares held by such members present and
voting. This amendment seeks to aligns the approval requirements for such schemes
with those applicable to schemes placed for sanction before the Tribunal under
section 230. It further seeks to amend clause (d) of sub-section (1) on similar lines which
relates to approval by creditors or class of creditors of the respective companies. It also
seeks to amend sub-section (2) by inserting a new proviso to provide that the copy of
the scheme need not be filed with the Official Liquidator in case it pertains to transfer
or division (demerger) of the undertaking of the company.
Clause 70 of the Bill seeks to insert a new section 233A in the Companies Act
relating to treatment of certain shares held in a name of a company or trust.
Sub-section (1) seeks to provide that where a transferee company, as a result of a
compromise or arrangement taken place before the commencement of the Companies
Act, 2013, has held shares in its own name or in the name of any trust (whether on its
behalf or on behalf of any of its subsidiary or associate companies), shall be required
to deal with or dispose of such shares within a period of three years from the date of
commencement of the proposed legislation in the manner as may be provided by rules.
Sub-section (2) provides that if a company fails to deal with or dispose of such shares,
these shall be cancelled and extinguished by the company in such manner, as may be
provided by rules, and such cancellation and extinguishment shall be deemed to be a
reduction of the share capital of the company. Sub-section (3) provides for penalty in
case of failure to comply with these provisions.
Clause 71 of the Bill seeks to omit offence referred to in sub-section (8) of
section 242 of the Companies Act. Section 425 of the said Act relating to power to
punish for contempt shall be applicable in such case.
Clause 72 of the Bill seeks to amend sub-section (1) of section 245 of the
Companies Act by substituting the reference to “sub-section (2)” with “sub-section (3)”
to correct the cross-reference.
Clause 73 of the Bill seeks to amend sub-section (1) of section 247 of the
Companies Act to provide for qualifications and experience for registered valuers. It
seeks to insert new sub-sections (1A), (1B) and (1C) in the said section to, inter alia, to
provide (i) that the Insolvency and Bankruptcy Board of India (IBBI) established under
section 188 of the Insolvency and Bankruptcy Code, 2016 shall be the Valuation
Authority for the purposes of the said section; (ii) for the manner of granting or renewing
57
certificate of recognition to valuers’ organisations and certificate of registration to
valuers (iii) for powers of Valuation Authority to make recommendations to the Central
Government on the formulation and laying down of the valuation standards and policies,
etc. (iv) that valuation under the Companies Act shall be undertaken only by a registered
valuer who shall be appointed by the audit committee or in its absence, by the Board of
Directors of that company, and in other cases, by such person, as may be provided by
rules. It also seeks to provide for the circumstances, manner, period and consequences
of suspension or cancellation of certificate of recognition or certificate of registration by
Valuation Authority. Sub-section (3B) seeks to provide that any person aggrieved by
an order of the Valuation Authority on suspension or cancellation may prefer an appeal
before the Appellate Tribunal. Sub-section (3E) seeks to provide that no court shall take
cognizance of any offence under sub-section (3C) or sub-section (3D) of section 247,
which is alleged to have been committed by any recognised valuers’ organisation or any
registered valuer, except on a complaint in writing by an officer authorised in this behalf
by the Valuation Authority or by the Central Government. It also seeks to insert new
sub-sections (5) and (6) to provide that the Valuation Authority shall make
recommendations to the Central Government on the valuation standards and policies,
and after examination of these recommendations, the Central Government may provide
such valuation standards or valuation policies, as may be provided by rules. It also seeks
to insert sub-section (7) to provide that the Valuation Authority shall be bound by such
directions on questions of policy, as the Central Government may give in writing. It also
seeks to insert sub-section (8) in the said section to provide that the Valuation Authority,
by a notification, may delegate to any member, officer, or any other person, its powers
and functions. It also seeks to insert sub-sections (9), (10) and (11) in the said section to
provide for the manner in which regulations may be made by the Valuation Authority.
Clause 74 of the Bill seeks to amend clause (c) of sub-section (1) of
section 248 of the Companies Act to rationalise the scope of ground for removal of
name from register of companies provided under such clause. The grounds relating
to (i) where the company has not made any significant accounting transaction during
the preceding two financial years and in the current financial year and (ii) where the
company has not filed financial statements or annual returns for two consecutive
financial years preceding the previous financial year have been proposed to be
included in such clause. It further seeks to amend sub-section (2) to provide for the
manner in which liabilities can be extinguished. It also seeks to omit the words “on
all or any of the grounds specified in sub-section (1)” from sub-section (2) so that
applications under the said sub-section can be made on independent grounds. It also
seeks to make consequential amendments in sub-sections (5) and (6).
Clause 75 of the Bill seeks to amend sub-section (2) of section 249 of the
Companies Act to replace the fine provided, that is, which may extend to one lakh
rupees with penalty of fifty thousand rupees to decriminalise the offence under the
provision.
Clause 76 of the Bill seeks to amend the marginal heading of section 252 of
the Companies Act to substitute the word “Tribunal” with the words “Regional
Director or Tribunal”. It further seeks to amend sub-section (1) of section 252 to
substitute “Regional Director” for word “Tribunal”, to convey that appeals for
restoration of names under such sub-section may be filed before Regional Directors.
Clause 77 of the Bill seeks to amend clause (a) of section 271 of the
Companies Act by omitting the words “by the Tribunal” in the said clause to enable
use of this clause for summery liquidation under section 361 which is approved by
the Central Government. It also seeks to omit the words “by notification under this
Act” in clause (c) to remove the requirement of issue of notification for authorisation
of any other person by the Central Government under the said provisions.
58
Clause 78 of the Bill seeks to amend sub-section (1) of section 361 of
Companies Act to substitute the words “under this Chapter” with the words “in
accordance with the provisions of this Chapter under the circumstances referred to
in clauses (a), (b) and (d) of section 271” to clarify the specific circumstances under
which such winding up may take place. It further seeks to substitute sub-section (2)
to provide that the Central Government shall appoint the Official Liquidator or an
insolvency professional registered under the Insolvency and Bankruptcy Code, 2016
as the liquidator of the company. It also seeks to amend sub-section (5) to provide
that investigation referred to in the said sub-section may be conducted by either the
Official Liquidator or any officer not below the rank of Assistant Director as may
be authorised by the Central Government.
Clause 79 of the Bill seeks to make consequential amendment in sub-section (3)
of section 365 of the Companies Act by substituting the words “notice in the Official
Gazette” for the word “notification”.
Clause 80 of the Bill seeks to insert a new section 365A in the Companies Act
to provide that any person aggrieved by an order of the Central Government under
Part IV may prefer an appeal before the Appellate Tribunal, within a period of
forty-five days from the date of receipt of such order by him, in such manner and on
payment of such fee, as may be provided by rules.
Clause 81 of the Bill seeks to amend sub-section (1) of section 366 of the
Companies Act to insert the words “any non-trading company” after the words
“co-operative society, society”, so as to enable such entities covered within the
scope of companies capable of being registered under the said Act.
Clause 82 of the Bill seeks to amend clause (c) of section 374 of the
Companies Act by substituting the requirement of filing a “duly notarised affidavit”,
with a “declaration”. This will facilitate ease of compliance. It further seeks to insert
the words “any non-trading company” after the words “co-operative society,
society”, to include such entities within the scope of the said provision.
Clause 83 of the Bill seeks to amend section 378P of the Companies Act by
omitting sub-section (2) and to substitute sub-section (5) to provide that the
directors of the Board in a Producer Company shall be elected or appointed by the
Members in the general meetings.
Clause 84 of the Bill seeks to amend clause (b) of sub-section (1) of section 378Q
of the Companies Act to replace the period of “ninety days” up to which the Producer
Company may make default in repayment of advances or loans to “one hundred and
eighty days” so that Producer companies get additional period in this regard.
Clause 85 of the Bill seeks to amend section 378Y of the Companies Act to
provide that the quorum for a general meeting for Producer Companies, shall be either
one-fourth of the total membership or one hundred members, whichever is less.
Clause 86 of the Bill seeks to amend section 378ZA of the Companies Act by
inserting a new proviso in sub-section (1) to provide that the first annual general
meeting shall be held within a period of nine months from the date of closing of the
first financial year and in any other case, within a period of six months, from the
date of closing of the financial year. Further, it provides that if a company holds
such first annual general meeting, it shall not be necessary for the company to hold
any annual general meeting in the year of its incorporation. Consequently,
sub-section (2) of section 378ZA is proposed to be omitted. It further seeks to
substitute sub-section (3) to provide that, in the first annual general meeting, the
members shall adopt the articles of the Producer Company as referred to in
clause (b) of sub-section (1) of section 378G and appoint the directors of its Board.
It also seeks to amend sub-section (9) to provide that the quorum for the annual
general meeting shall be one-fourth of the total number of members or one hundred
members of the Producer Company, whichever is less.
59
Clause 87 of the Bill seeks to substitute section 378ZF of the Companies Act
to provide for the requirements in respect of thresholds of turnover, qualification,
manner of appointment of internal auditor and intervals in which the internal audit
shall be conducted and reported to the Board by producer companies.
Clause 88 of the Bill seeks to amend sub-section (1) of section 378ZM of the
Companies Act to modify the fine under this provision, with penalty. It further seeks
to amend sub-section (2) to modify the punishment of imprisonment and fine to that
of penalty. It also seeks to substitute sub-section (3) of the said section to provide
that any director or officer of a Producer Company who fails to hand over custody
of books of accounts or other documents or property in his custody; or fails to
convene annual general meeting or general meetings, shall be liable to penalty.
Accordingly, it is proposed to decriminalise the offence under this section.
Clause 89 of the Bill seeks to substitute fine under sub-section (6) of
section 378ZS of the Companies Act with penalty of one hundred rupees for each copy
in respect of which default is made. Accordingly, it is proposed to decriminalise the
offence under this section.
Clause 90 of the Bill seeks to amend section 392 of the Companies Act to
substitute the existing punishment of fine with a penalty for contravention of the
provisions of that section. Accordingly, it is proposed to decriminalise the offence
under this section.
Clause 91 of the Bill seeks to substitute the words “offices” with “and other
offices” in the marginal heading in section 396 of the Companies Act to clarify that
centralised offices for processing of e-forms, carrying out scrutiny, etc., can also be
established within the scope of the section. It further seeks to insert a new
sub-section (1A) in the said section to empower the Central Government to appoint
such number of Regional Directors, Additional Regional Directors, or Joint
Regional Directors or Deputy Regional Directors, as it considers necessary for the
discharge of various functions under the Act. It also seeks to amend sub-section (2)
to include the scope for appointment of other officers in additional to Registrars,
Additional, Deputy, Assistant Registrars presently provided in the said section. It
seeks to insert a new sub-section (2A) to empower the Central Government to
authorise one or more officers of that Government of appropriate rank to exercise
the powers and duties of the Regional Director or the Registrar under the said Act.
Clause 92 of the Bill seeks to insert a new section 396A in the Companies Act
to provide that any person aggrieved by the decision of the Registrar under section 4
or section 7, may prefer an appeal to an officer not below the rank of the Joint Director
as may be authorised by the Central Government, in such form and manner, and within
such period as may be provided by rules.
Clause 93 of the Bill seeks to amend the first proviso to sub-section (1) of
section 403 of the Companies Act to substitute the minimum additional fee of “not less
than one hundred rupees per day” in case of delayed filings under sections 92 and 137,
with fee of “not less than such amount as may be prescribed” so that the amounts other
than one hundred rupees can be provided under the said provisions for any class or
classes of companies. It also seeks to provide that the additional fees shall be subject to
a maximum limit of two lakh rupees for prescribed class or classes of companies.
Clause 94 of the Bill seeks to amend clause (a) of section 410 of the
Companies Act to insert the words “or of the Valuation Authority” so as to empower
the National Company Law Appellate Tribunal (NCLAT) to also hear appeals
against any order of the Valuation Authority.
Clause 95 of the Bill seeks to insert a new sub-section (3) in section 418A of
the Companies Act to provide that if the Members of a Bench of the NCLAT differ
in opinion on any point or points, it shall be decided according to the majority, if
there is a majority, but if the Members are equally divided, they shall state the point
or points on which they differ, and the case shall be referred by the Chairperson for
hearing on such point or points by one or more of the other Members of the NCLAT
and such point or points shall be decided according to the opinion of the majority of
Members who have heard the case, including those who first heard it.
60
Clause 96 of the Bill seeks to amend sub-section (4) of section 419 of the
Companies Act to replace the words “Part II of” with “any of the provisions of” so
that benches of NCLT may be constituted in respect of jurisdiction, powers and
authority of Adjudicating Authority for any provision of the Insolvency and
Bankruptcy Code, 2016. It further seeks to insert a new sub-section (4A) in the said
section to provide that the President may constitute, in such manner as may be
provided by rules, one or more special benches of the NCLT for the disposal of any
case under the Companies Act or the Insolvency and Bankruptcy Code, 2016.
Clause 97 of the Bill seeks to amend clause (b) of sub-section (1) of
section 441 of the Companies Act to replace the words “does not exceed
twenty-five lakh rupees”, with the words “does not exceed one crore rupees” to
enhance the jurisdictional threshold for applications for compounding to the
Regional Director or any officer authorised by the Central Government.
Clause 98 of the Bill seeks to amend section 446B of the Companies Act to
replace the words “liable to a penalty which shall not be more than one-half of the
penalty”, with the words “liable to a penalty of one-half, or such per cent. not
exceeding one-half, as may be prescribed, of the penalty”. This clause seeks to
empower the Central Government to provide such per cent. less than one-half up to
which penalty amount can be levied in case of defaults by One Person Company,
small company, start-up company or Producer Company or their officers in default
or any other person, by rules.
Clause 99 of the Bill seeks to amend section 447 of the Companies Act to
replace the words “ten lakh rupees”, with the words “twenty-five lakh rupees” and
to replace the words “fifty lakh rupees”, with the words “one crore rupees”, which
is consequential to the change made in section 441 of the said Act.
Clause 100 of the Bill seeks to amend section 453 of the Companies Act to
provide that in case of improper use of words “Limited” or “Private Limited”, the
person or persons concerned shall be liable to a penalty of one lakh rupees and in
case of continuing failure, with a further penalty of five hundred rupees for each day
subject to a maximum of five lakh rupees. Accordingly, it is proposed to
decriminalise the offences under this section.
Clause 101 of the Bill seeks to amend sub-section (1) of section 454 of the
Companies Act to replace the word “Registrar” with the words “Assistant Registrar”
so that officers not below the rank of Assistant Registrars can be appointed as
adjudicating officer. It further seeks to insert a new sub-section (1A) to provide that
a company or its officer in default may make an application in such form, manner
and on payment of such fees as may be provided by rules for adjudication of penalty.
This is to ensure that the companies and officers in default may apply suo moto for
adjudication of penalties. It also seeks to amend sub-section (5) to insert words “or
to such Appellate Authority, as the Central Government may, by notification,
specify” so that officers, other than Regional Directors, being not below the rank of
Joint Director may also be appointed as Appellate Authority to hear appeal under
section 454. It also seeks to amend clauses (i) and (ii) of sub-section (8) of the said
section to provide that the Court concerned, while imposing fine or imprisonment,
shall also have the power to direct companies or officers in default to pay the amount
of penalty imposed under the said section in addition to fine or imprisonment to be
imposed by the Court. It also seeks to insert a new sub-section (9) to provide that all
penalties realised under the said section shall be credited to the Consolidated Fund
of India. It also seeks to insert a new sub-section (10) to provide that from the
commencement of the proposed legislation, where a provision in respect of any
offence provided in the Companies Act has been amended to provide for
adjudication under the said section, the manner of withdrawal of the complaint and
the manner of transfer of such matter for adjudication under the said section,
whether pending in the Court or otherwise, shall be dealt with in accordance with
such Scheme as may be notified by the Central Government.
61
Clause 102 of the Bill seeks to amend section 454A of the Companies Act to
provide that after the words “Regional Director”, the words, brackets and figures
“or the Appellate Authority referred to in sub-section (5) of section 454” shall be
inserted, which is consequential in nature to change proposed in sub-section (5) of
section 454.
Clause 103 of the Bill seeks to insert new sections 454B, 454C and 454D in
the Companies Act. New section 454B seeks to provide the procedure for recovery
of amounts by the Recovery Officer if a person fails to pay the penalty imposed
under the Act. It, inter alia, provides that the Recovery Officer shall have the power
to seek assistance of local district administration while exercising powers under this
section. New section 454C seeks to provide for the procedure for settlement for the
contraventions which shall be liable for a penalty under Companies Act. It,
inter alia, provides that the Central Government may constitute a Specified
Authority (comprising of an officer or group of Officers of Central Government) to
discharge functions under this section. The clause also seeks to insert new section
454D to provide that no appeal by a person who is required to pay any amount in
terms of an order of the National Financial Reporting Authority, the Valuation
Authority, or the adjudicating officer shall be entertained unless the person has
deposited ten per cent. of that penalty amount in the manner as directed by the
National Company Law Appellate Tribunal or Regional Director or the Appellate
Authority as the case may be.
Clause 104 of the Bill seeks to amend sub-section (1) of section 455 of the
Companies Act to replace the words “or an inactive company may” with the words
“or an inactive company shall” so that the provisions have mandatory force. It
further seeks to amend clause (i) of the Explanation to sub-section (1) of
section 455 to replace the words “financial statements and”, with the words
“financial statements or” to clarify that a company shall be treated as inactive,
amongst other conditions, if it has not filed financial statements or annual returns
during the preceding two financial years. It also seeks to amend clause (ii) of the
Explanation to sub-section (1) to insert new sub-para (e) to include “receipt or
payment not relatable to the business or operations of the company” as transactions
which shall not be treated as “significant accounting transaction”.
Clause 105 of the Bill seeks to amend clause (a) of section 457 of the
Companies Act to provide that, after the word and figures “section 210”, the words
and figures “or section 212” shall be inserted, which is consequential in nature.
Clause 106 of the Bill seeks to insert a new section 466A in the Companies
Act to empower the Central Government to issue directions, guidelines or circulars
for the purpose of clarifying the meaning or intent of any rule, or for laying down
procedural requirements ancillary to any rules.
Clause 107 of the Bill seeks to substitute sub-section (3) of section 469 to
provide that any rule made under sub-section (1) may provide that in case of
contravention thereof, the company, every officer of the company who is in default
or any other person, shall be liable to a penalty of an amount, as may be prescribed,
which shall not be more than five lakh rupees, and in case of continuing default,
with a further penalty of such amount, as may be provided by rules, which shall not
be more than five thousand rupees for every day during which such default
continues. Accordingly, it is proposed to decriminalise to offences referred to in
sub-section (3) of section 469 of the said Act.
FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM
Clause 41 of the Bill seeks to insert a new section 132B to provide for a fund
to be called the National Financial Reporting Authority Fund. Sub-section (1) of the
proposed new section 132B provides that the Central Government may, after due
appropriation made by Parliament by law in this behalf, make to the National
Financial Reporting Authority, grants of such sums of money as that Government
may think fit for being utilised for the purposes of this Act. The other provisions of
the Bill will not involve any expenditure of recurring or non-recurring nature, on its
enactment.
62
MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION
Clause 3 of the Bill empowers the Central Government to make rules under
clauses (c) and (d) of sub-section (1) of section 11 of the Limited Liability Partnership
Act, 2008, in respect of the form of the statement to be filed along with the incorporation
document, by any one person who subscribed his name to the incorporation document
and the form of declaration to be filed by an advocate, a chartered accountant, cost
accountant or company secretary in practice, where a limited liability partnership
engaged such professionals in its formation or incorporation.
Clause 6 of the Bill empowers the Central Government to make rules under the
proviso to sub-section (2) of section 23 of the Limited Liability Partnership Act, 2008,
in respect of the class or classes of limited liability partnerships regulated by the
Securities and Exchange Board of India (SEBI), or by the International Financial
Services Centres Authority (IFSCA), and the requirement of filing changes in the
limited liability partnership agreement to the Registrar, by such limited liability
partnerships.
Clause 7 of the Bill empowers the Central Government to make rules under the
proviso to sub-section (2) of section 25 of the Limited Liability Partnership Act, 2008,
in respect of the class or classes of limited liability partnerships regulated by the SEBI,
or the IFSCA, and the form and manner of furnishing the details of changes in partners
to the Registrar on an annual basis, by such limited liability partnerships.
Clause 12 of the Bill empowers the Central Government to make rules under
the explanation to section 57A of the Limited Liability Partnership Act, 2008, in
respect of the activities that may be carried out by a “specified trust” established
under the Indian Trusts Act, 1882 or under a Central Act or State Act, and registered
by the SEBI, or by the IFSCA, as the case may be.
Clause 13 of the Bill empowers the Central Government to make rules under the
proviso to sub-section (1) of section 58 of the Limited Liability Partnership Act, 2008,
in respect of information about conversion and the form and manner of the conversion
and of the particulars of the limited liability partnership that are required to be
intimated to the concerned Registrar of Firms or Registrar of Companies or any other
authority, as the case may be, with which it was registered or established under the
provisions of the Indian Partnership Act, 1932 or the Companies Act, 2013, or any
other law for the time being in force, as the case may be.
Clause 14 of the Bill empowers the Central Government to make rules under
the proviso to sub-section (1) of section 68 of the Limited Liability Partnership
Act, 2008, in respect of the manner in which a Specified International Financial
Services Centres LLP shall use permitted foreign currency, for the purpose of filing,
recording, or registering any document under the said section.
Clause 15 of the Bill empowers the Central Government to make rules under
section 68B of the Limited Liability Partnership Act, 2008, in respect of the form and
manner, and period within which any person aggrieved by the decision of the Registrar
under section 12 or section 16 of the Limited Liability Partnership Act, 2008 may
prefer an appeal and to prescribe the officer of the Central Government to whom the
appeal may be preferred.
Clause 16 of the Bill empowers the Central Government to make rules under
sub-section (1A) of section 76A of the Limited Liability Partnership Act, 2008, in
respect of the form and manner of making an application, and the fees payable by a
limited liability partnership or its partner or designated partner for adjudication of
penalties under section 76A. It also empowers the Central Government to notify a
scheme to deal with the manner of withdrawal of the complaint and transfer of any
matter thereto for adjudication under section 76A if such complaint or matter relates
to those offences in respect of which, on and from the commencement of the
Corporate Laws (Amendment) Act, 2026, the provision has been amended to
provide for adjudication under section 76A.
63
64
Clause 17 of the Bill empowers the Central Government to make rules under
paragraph 4(a) of the Fifth Schedule of the Limited Liability Partnership Act, 2008,
in respect of the form and manner, and such fee for the statement by all of its trustees,
containing the particulars as given under paragraph 4(a).
It further empowers the Central Government to make rules under paragraph 5
of the Fifth Schedule, in respect of the form and manner in which the limited liability
partnership shall inform the concerned authority about the conversion and of the
particulars of the limited liability partnership.
Clause 18 of the Bill empowers the Central Government to make rules under
clause (41) of section 2 of the Companies Act, 2013, in respect of the form and
manner of an application made to the Central Government by a company or body
corporate referred to in the first proviso to clause (41) of section (2) or, on
commercial considerations, by any other company or body corporate, to realign its
financial year as the period ending on the 31st day of March of the following year.
Clause 20 of the Bill empowers the Central Government to make rules under
clauses (b) and (ba) of sub-section (1) of section 7 of the Companies Act, 2013, in
respect of the form of the declaration by a person named in the articles as a director,
manager or secretary of the company, and the form of a declaration by an advocate,
a chartered accountant, cost accountant or company secretary in practice, where a
company engaged such professionals in its formation or incorporation.
Clause 21 of the Bill empowers the Central Government to make rules under
sub-section (1) of section 12A of the Companies Act, 2013, in respect of the class or
classes of companies which shall maintain a website, an e-mail address and other
modes of communication, and the form and manner for maintaining the same. It
further seeks to empower the Central Government, under sub-section (2) of
section 12A, to make rules, in respect of the form and period within which the details
of such website, e-mail address and other modes of communication and any changes
therein, shall be intimated to the Registrar.
Clause 22 of the Bill empowers the Central Government to make rules under
the proviso to sub-section (2) of section 20 of the Companies Act, 2013, in respect
of the class or classes of companies, the class of documents which may be serviced,
and the manner of service of such documents by such companies.
Clause 27 of the Bill empowers the Central Government to make rules under
sub-section (3) of section 43A of the Companies Act, 2013, in respect of the manner
in which the Central Government may require that a company referred to in
sub-section (1) of the said section shall use permitted foreign currency for the purpose
of filing, submitting or delivering any documents under section 398 of the
Companies Act, 2013.
Clause 29 of the Bill empowers the Central Government to make rules under
the proviso to clause (c) of sub-section (2) of section 68 of the Companies Act, 2013,
in respect of the class or classes of companies, and the percentage of the aggregate
of paid-up capital and free reserves, up to which a buy-back may be made by such
prescribed class or classes of companies. Further, it empowers the Central
Government to make rules under the proviso to clause (g) of said sub-section (2) in
respect of the class or classes of companies which may make up to two offers of
buy-backs within a period of one year.
Clause 30 of the Bill empowers the Central Government to make rules under
the proviso to sub-section (1) of section 77 of the Companies Act, 2013, in respect
of the class or classes of companies for which the period of “sixty days” in
clause (b) of the second proviso shall be read as “one hundred and twenty days”.
Clause 32 of the Bill empowers the Central Government to make rules under
sub-section (3) of section 96 of the Companies Act, 2013, in respect of the manner,
terms and conditions for a company to hold its annual general meeting through video
conferencing or other audio-visual means, either wholly or partly.
65
Clause 34 of the Bill empowers the Central Government to make rules under
sub-section (7) of section 100 of the Companies Act, 2013, in respect of the manner,
terms and conditions for a company to hold its extraordinary general meeting
through video conferencing or other audio-visual means, either wholly or partly.
Clause 35 of the Bill empowers the Central Government to make rules under
sub-section (1) of section 101 of the Companies Act, 2013, in respect of the period
for notice and the manner of issuing notice by a company conducting its
extraordinary general meeting wholly through video conferencing or audio-visual
means under sub-section (7) of section 100.
Clause 37 of the Bill empowers the Central Government to make rules under
sub-section (4) of section 125 of the Companies Act, 2013, in respect of the
procedure for application and the documents which are required to be submitted by
any person claiming to be entitled to the amount referred to in sub-section (2). It
also empowers the Investor Education and Protection Fund Authority under
sub-section (12) of section 125 to delegate, by way of notification, to any member,
officer or any other person subject to such conditions, if any, in such notification,
any of its powers and functions under this Act as it deems necessary.
Clause 40 of the Bill empowers the Central Government to make rules under
clause (a) of sub-section (4) of section 132 of the Companies Act, 2013, in respect
of the class of body corporate or persons in respect of whom action may be taken
under the said clause.
Clause 41 of the Bill empowers the Central Government to make rules under
sub-section (1) of proposed section 132A of the Companies Act, 2013, in respect of
the time, manner and fees for an individual or firm to intimate the details of his or
its registration with the Institute of Chartered Accountants of India, to the National
Financial Reporting Authority.
Clause 42 of the Bill empowers the Central Government to make rules under
clause (fa) of sub-section (3) of section 134 of the Companies Act, 2013, in respect
of the form of the explanations or comments by the Board to be included within the
report of the Board of Directors, on every observation or comment of the auditors
on financial transactions or matters which have any adverse effect on the functioning
of the company under clause (f) of sub-section (3) of section 143 and any
qualification, reservation or adverse remark relating to the maintenance of accounts
and other matters connected therewith under clause (h) of sub-section (3) of
section 143.
Clause 43 of the Bill empowers the Central Government to make rules under
sub-section (1) of section 135 of the Companies Act, 2013, in respect of the amount
of net profit for constitution of the Corporate Social Responsibility (CSR)
Committee. It also empowers the Central Government to make rules under
sub-section (9), in respect of higher amount which would need to be spent in
pursuant of CSR Policy for the purpose of requirement of constitution of CSR
Committee. It also empowers the Central Government under sub-section (10) to
make rules in respect of the class or classes of companies and the conditions which
must be fulfilled by such companies, which shall not be required to comply with the
provisions of section 135.
Clause 44 of the Bill empowers the Central Government to make rules under
sub-section (12) of section 139 of the Companies Act, 2013, in respect of the class or
classes of companies, and the conditions which must be fulfilled by such companies,
which shall not be required to appoint auditors under Chapter X of the Companies
Act, 2013.
66
Clause 46 of the Bill empowers the Central Government to make rules under
the proviso to section 144 of the Companies Act, 2013, in respect of the class or
classes of companies, of which the auditor or audit firm, shall not provide, directly
or indirectly, any non-audit services to the company or its holding or subsidiary.
Clause 48 of the Bill empowers the Central Government to make rules under
sub-section (1A) of section 148 of the Companies Act, 2013, in respect of the
standards of cost accounting or any addendum thereto, after examination of
recommendations of the Institute of Cost Accountants of India, constituted under
the Cost Accountants Act, 1959.
Clause 49 of the Bill empowers the Central Government to make rules under
item (B) of sub-clause (ii) of clause (e) of sub-section (6) of section 149 of the
Companies Act, 2013, in respect of such lower per cent. of the gross turnover of a
legal or consulting firm having transactions with the company, its holding,
subsidiary or associate company.
Clause 51 of the Bill empowers the Central Government to make rules under
sub-section (2) of section 154 of the Companies Act, 2013, in respect of the intervals
and manner in which a person who has been allotted a Director Identification
Number shall submit such information towards verification of his particulars to the
Central Government or an officer authorised by that Government in this behalf. It
further empowers the Central Government to make rules, under sub-section (3) of
section 154, in respect of the manner in which the Director Identification Number
allotted to a person may be deactivated or cancelled by the Central Government or
the officer authorised by that Government in this behalf. It also empowers the
Central Government to make rules under sub-section (6) of section 154, in respect
of the manner in which a person may surrender the Director Identification Number
allotted to him. It also empowers the Central Government to make rules under
sub-section (7) of section 154, in respect of the conditions, fees, and manner for
reactivation or restoration of a Director Identification Number that has been
deactivated or cancelled or surrendered under sub-section (3) or (6) of section 154.
Clause 54 of the Bill empowers the Central Government to make rules under
clause (k) of sub-section (1) of section 164 of the Companies Act, 2013, in respect
of the criteria for assessment by the Board in respect of a person being a fit and
proper person, and to prescribe different criteria for fit and proper person for
different class or classes of companies.
Clause 63 of the Bill empowers the Central Government to make rules under
sub-section (1) of section 203A of the Companies Act, 2013, in respect of the form and
manner and the time within which the Board shall intimate the Registrar of the
resignation of a whole-time key managerial personnel who is not a director. It further
empowers the Central Government to make rules under the proviso to sub-section (1)
of section 203A, in respect of the manner in which the said key managerial personnel
may forward a copy of his resignation along with detailed reasons for his resignation to
the Registrar.
Clause 69 of the Bill empowers the Central Government to make rules under
clause (b) of sub-section (1) of section 233 of the Companies Act, 2013, in respect
of the manner in which the meeting of members or class of members present and
voting shall be held for approval of the scheme.
Clause 70 of the Bill empowers the Central Government to make rules under
sub-section (1) of section 233A of the Companies Act, 2013, in respect of the
manner in which shares held by a transferee company in its own name or in the
name of any trust (whether on its behalf or on behalf of any of its subsidiary or
associate companies) shall be dealt with or disposed of. It further empowers the
Central Government to make rules under sub-section (2) of section 233A, in respect
of the manner in which shares shall be cancelled and extinguished by the company
where it fails to deal with or dispose of the shares referred to in sub-section (1) of
section 233A.
67
Clause 73 of the Bill empowers the Central Government to make rules under
clause (f) of sub-section (1B) of section 247, such other functions relating to
clauses (a) to (e) of sub-section (1B) which may be performed by the Valuation
Authority. It also empowers the Central Government to make rules under
sub-section (1C), the person who may appoint a registered valuer, in cases other
than appointment by the audit committee or by the Board of Directors of that
company. It also empowers the Central Government to make rules under clause (c)
of sub-section (2), in respect of the valuation standards and policies.
It also empowers the Central Government to make rules under
sub-section (3B) of section 247, the manner in which, and the fees on payment of
which any person aggrieved by an order of the Valuation Authority, under
sub-section (3) or (3A) of section 247 may prefer an appeal before the Appellate
Tribunal. It further empowers the Central Government to make rules under
sub-section (5), companies or class of companies or such entities or class of entities
who shall adopt valuation policies and standards formulated and laid down by the
Central Government. It also empowers the Central Government to make rules under
sub-section (6), the valuation standards or valuation policies or any addendum
thereto, after examination of the recommendations of the Valuation Authority.
Clause 74 of the Bill empowers the Central Government to make rules under
sub-section (2) of section 248 of the Companies Act, 2013, in respect of the manner
in which a company may extinguish all its liabilities before filing an application to
the Registrar for removing the name of the company from the register of companies.
Clause 80 of the Bill empowers the Central Government to make rules under
section 365A of the Companies Act, 2013, in respect of the manner in which, and
the fee on payment of which any person aggrieved by an order of the Central
Government under Part IV of Chapter XX of the Companies Act, 2013, may prefer
an appeal within a period of forty-five days from the date of receipt of such order
by him.
Clause 82 of the Bill empowers the Central Government to make rules under
clause (c) of section 374 of the Companies Act, 2013, in respect of the form of the
declaration to be filed by all the members or partners in the event of registration
under Part I of Chapter XXI of the Companies Act, 2013.
Clause 87 of the Bill empowers the Central Government to make rules under
sub-section (1) of section 378ZF of the Companies Act, 2013, in respect of such
other amount of average annual turnover in each of the three consecutive financial
years for requiring a Producer Company to appoint an internal auditor. It further
empowers the Central Government to make rules under sub-section (2) of
section 378ZF, in respect of the manner and the intervals in which the internal audit
shall be conducted and reported to the Board.
Clause 91 of the Bill empowers the Central Government to make rules under
sub-section (1A) of section 396 of the Companies Act, 2013, in respect of the powers
and duties that may be exercisable by the Regional Directors, Additional Regional
Directors or Joint Regional Directors or Deputy Regional Directors, appointed by the
Central Government for discharge of various functions under the Companies
Act, 2013.
Clause 92 of the Bill empowers the Central Government to make rules under
section 396A of the Companies Act, 2013, in respect of the form and manner in
which and the period within which any person aggrieved by the decision of the
Registrar under section 4 or section 7 of the Companies Act, 2013, may prefer an
appeal to an officer not below the rank of the Joint Director, as may be authorised
by the Central Government.
68
Clause 93 of the Bill empowers the Central Government to make rules under
the first proviso to sub-section (1) of section 403 of the Companies Act, 2013, in
respect of the amount per day payable for submitting, filing, registering or recording
any document, fact or information after expiry of the period provided under
sections 92 or 137. It further empowers the Central Government to make rules,
under the second proviso to sub-section (1) of section 403, in respect of such class
and classes of companies, for which the amount of additional fees shall not exceed
two lakh rupees.
Clause 96 of the Bill empowers the Central Government to make rules through
sub-section (4A) of section 419 of the Companies Act, 2013, in respect of the
manner in which the President may constitute one or more Special Benches of the
Tribunal to exercise the powers of the Tribunal for the disposal of cases under the
Companies Act, 2013 or under the Insolvency and Bankruptcy Code, 2016.
Clause 98 of the Bill empowers the Central Government to make rules through
section 446B of the Companies Act, 2013, in respect of such per cent., not exceeding
one-half, of the penalty specified in such provisions payable for non-compliance by
a One Person Company, small company, start-up company, or Producer Company,
or any of its officer in default, or any other person in respect of such company.
Clause 101 of the Bill empowers the Central Government to make rules under
sub-section (1A) of section 454 of the Companies Act, 2013, in respect of the form
and manner and such fees payable for making an application for adjudication of
penalty under that section, by a company or its officer who is in default. It also
empowers the Central Government to notify a scheme to deal with the manner of
withdrawal of the complaint and transfer of any matter thereto for adjudication
under that section if such complaint or matter relates to those offences in respect of
which, on and from the commencement of the Corporate Laws (Amendment)
Act, 2026, the provision has been amended to provide for adjudication under that
section.
Clause 103 of the Bill empowers the Central Government to make rules under
sub-section (3) of section 454C of the Companies Act, 2013, in respect of the form
and manner of filing an application in writing to the Specified Authority by any
person, against whom any proceeding has been initiated for contravention of any
provision referred to in sub-section (1) of section 454C. It further empowers the
Central Government to make rules under sub-section (5) of section 454C of the
Companies Act, 2013, in respect of the terms and manner of implementation of
settlement and monitoring, and the sum on payment of which the Specified
Authority may agree to the proposal of settlement.
It also empowers the Central Government to make rules under sub-section (6)
of section 454C of the Companies Act, 2013, in respect of the time within which the
Specified Authority and applicant concerned do not reach an agreement on the terms
of settlement, before it rejects the application for settlement the proceedings initiated
against the applicant are continued.
It also empowers the Central Government to make rules under sub-section (7)
of section 454C of the Companies Act, 2013, in respect of the manner in which the
settlement proceedings under section 454C shall be conducted.
Clause 106 of the Bill empowers the Central Government to make rules under
the proviso to section 466A of the Companies Act, 2013, in respect of the manner
in which the Central Government shall hold consultation with expert bodies or
individuals, before issuing directions or guidelines or circulars under
section 466A.
69
Clause 107 of the Bill empowers the Central Government to make rules under
sub-section (3) of section 469 of the Companies Act, 2013, in respect of the amount
of penalty, not exceeding five lakh rupees, and the amount of further penalty, not
exceeding five thousand rupees for every day, which may be levied on any company
or officer in default or any other person for contravention of any rule made under
sub-section (1) of section 469.
2. Further, clause 40 of the Bill empowers the National Financial Reporting
Authority to make regulations to specify the manner in which such action may be
undertaken. It further empowers the National Financial Reporting Authority to make
regulations in respect of—(a) the times and places and manner of observing rules of
procedure in regard to the transaction of business at its meetings under
sub-section (10); (b) salary, allowances and other terms and conditions of service of
the secretary and employees under sub-section (11); (c) the manner in which it may
engage experts and professionals under sub-section (17). Clause 41 of the Bill also
empowers the National Financial Reporting Authority to make regulations, under
sub-section (2) of section 132A, in respect of the form and manner, the period, and
the fees for filing of documents, returns or information by the auditors of relevant
companies or bodies corporate. Clause 73 of the Bill also empowers the Valuation
Authority to make regulations, under sub-section (1) of section 247 of the
Companies Act, 2013, in respect of the qualifications and experience for a person
who may conduct a valuation is required to be made under the provision of the
Companies Act, 2013. It also empowers the Valuation Authority to make
regulations in respect of the terms and conditions subject to which certificate of
recognition may be granted or renewed to valuers’ organisations; terms and
conditions subject to which certificate of registration may be granted or renewed to
valuers; the manner in which compliance with valuation standards and policies shall
be monitored and enforced; and the manner in which the valuer shall make the
valuation.
3. The matters in respect of which the rules and regulations may be made are
matters of procedure and administrative detail, and as such, it is not practical to
provide for them in the proposed Bill itself. The delegation of legislative power is,
therefore, of a normal character.
ANNEXURE
EXTRACTS FROM THE LIMITED LIABILITY PARTNERSHIP ACT, 2008
(6 OF 2009)
* * * * *
Definitions.
2.(1) In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,—
* * * * *
(m) “foreign limited liability partnership” means a limited liability
partnership formed, incorporated or registered outside India which
establishes a place of business within India;
* * * * *
(q) “partner”, in relation to a limited liability partnership, means any
person who becomes a partner in the limited liability partnership in
accordance with the limited liability partnership agreement;
* * * * *
(ta) “small limited liability partnership” means a limited liability
partnership—
(i) the contribution of which, does not exceed twenty-five lakh
rupees or such higher amount, not exceeding five crore rupees, as may
be prescribed; and
(ii)the turnover of which, as per the Statement of Accounts and
Solvency for the immediately preceding financial year, does not
exceed forty lakh rupees or such higher amount, not exceeding fifty
crore rupees, as may be prescribed; or
(iii)which meets such other requirements as may be prescribed,
and fulfils such terms and conditions as may be prescribed;
* * * * *
CHAPTER III
INCORPORATION OF LIMITED LIABILITY PARTNERSHIP AND MATTERS INCIDENTAL
THERETO
11.(1) For a limited liability partnership to be incorporated,—
Incorporation
document.
* * * * *
(c) there shall be filed along with the incorporation document, a
statement in the prescribed form, made by either an advocate, or a Company
Secretary or a Chartered Accountant or a Cost Accountant, who is engaged
in the formation of the limited liability partnership and by any one who
subscribed his name to the incorporation document, that all the requirements
of this Act and the rules made thereunder have been complied with, in respect
of incorporation and matters precedent and incidental thereto.
(2)The incorporation document shall—
* * * * *
(c)state the proposed business of the limited liability partnership;
* * * * *
13. (1) Every limited liability partnership shall have a registered office to
Registered office
of limited which all communications and notices may be addressed and where they shall be
liability received.
partnership and
change therein.
* * * * *
70
71
15. (1) Every limited liability partnership shall have either the words “limited Name.
liability partnership” or the acronym “LLP” as the last words of its name.
* * * * *
23. (1) * * * * * Relationship of
partners.
(2) The limited liability partnership agreement and any changes, if any, made
therein shall be filed with the Registrar in such form, manner and accompanied by
such fees as may be prescribed.
* * * * *
25. (1) * * * * * Registration of
changes in
(2) A limited liability partnership shall— partners.
(a) where a person becomes or ceases to be a partner, file a notice with
the Registrar within thirty days from the date he becomes or ceases to be a
partner; and
(b) where there is any change in the name or address of a partner, file a
notice with the Registrar within thirty days of such change.
* * * * *
CHAPTER VI
CONTRIBUTIONS
32. (1) * * * * * Form of
contribution.
(2) The monetary value of contribution of each partner shall be accounted for
and disclosed in the accounts of the limited liability partnership in the manner as
may be prescribed.
* * * * *
CHAPTER VII
FINANCIAL DISCLOSURES
34. (1) The limited liability partnership shall maintain such proper books of Maintenance of
account as may be prescribed relating to its affairs for each year of its existence on books of
account, other
cash basis or accrual basis and according to double entry system of accounting and
records and
shall maintain the same at its registered office for such period as may be prescribed. audit, etc.
* * * * *
(5) Any limited liability partnership which fails to comply with the provisions
of sub-section (3), such limited liability partnership and its designated partners shall
be liable to a penalty of one hundred rupees for each day during which such failure
continues, subject to a maximum of one lakh rupees for the limited liability
partnership and fifty thousand rupees for every designated partner.
(6) Any limited liability partnership which fails to comply with the provisions
of sub-section (1), sub-section (2) and sub-section (4), such limited liability
partnership shall be punishable with fine which shall not be less than twenty-five
thousand rupees, but may extend to five lakh rupees and every designated partner
of such limited liability partnership shall be punishable with fine which shall not be
less than ten thousand rupees, but may extend to one lakh rupees.
* * * * *
38. (1) * * * * * Power of
Registrar to
(3) Any person who, without lawful excuse, fails to comply with any summons obtain
or requisition of the Registrar under this section shall be punishable with fine which information.
shall not be less than two thousand rupees but which may extend to twenty-five
thousand rupees.
* * * * *
72
Registration and 58. (1) The Registrar, on satisfying that a firm, private company or an unlisted
effect of
public company, as the case may be, has complied with the provisions of the Second
conversion.
Schedule, the Third Schedule or the Fourth Schedule, as the case may be, shall,
subject to the provisions of this Act and the rules made thereunder, register the
documents submitted under such Schedule and issue a certificate of registration in
such form as the Registrar may determine stating that the limited liability
partnership is, on and from the date specified in the certificate, registered under this
Act:
Provided that the limited liability partnership shall, within fifteen days of the
date of registration, inform the concerned Registrar of Firms or Registrar of
Companies, as the case may be, with which it was registered under the provisions
of the Indian Partnership Act, 1932 or the Companies Act, 2013 as the case may be, 9 of 1932.
about the conversion and of the particulars of the limited liability partnership in such 18 of 2013.
form and manner as may be prescribed.
(2) Upon such conversion, the partners of the firm, the shareholders of private
company or unlisted public company, as the case may be, the limited liability
partnership to which such firm or such company has converted, and the partners of
the limited liability partnership shall be bound by the provisions of the Second
Schedule, the Third Schedule or the Fourth Schedule, as the case may be, applicable
to them.
(3) Upon such conversion, on and from the date of certificate of registration,
the effects of the conversion shall be such as specified in the Second Schedule, the
Third Schedule or the Fourth Schedule, as the case may be.
(4) Notwithstanding anything contained in any other law for the time being in
force, on and from the date of registration specified in the certificate of registration
issued under the Second Schedule, the Third Schedule or the Fourth Schedule, as
the case may be,—
(a) there shall be a limited liability partnership by the name specified in
the certificate of registration registered under this Act;
(b) all tangible (movable or immovable) and intangible property vested
in the firm or the company, as the case may be, all assets, interests, rights,
privileges, liabilities, obligations relating to the firm or the company, as the
case may be, and the whole of the undertaking of the firm or the company, as
the case may be, shall be transferred to and shall vest in the limited liability
partnership without further assurance, act or deed; and
(c) the firm or the company, as the case may be, shall be deemed to be
dissolved and removed from the records of the Registrar of Firms or Registrar
of Companies, as the case may be.
* * * * *
Electronic filing 68. (1) Any document required to be filed, recorded or registered under this
of documents. Act may be filed, recorded or registered in such manner and subject to such
conditions as may be prescribed.
* * * * *
________________
73
EXTRACTS FROM THE COMPANIES ACT, 2013
(18 OF 2013)
* * * * *
2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,—
Definitions.
* * * * *
(28) “Cost Accountant” means a cost accountant as defined in clause (b)
23 of 1959. of sub-section (1) of section 2 of the Cost and Works Accountants Act, 1959
and who holds a valid certificate of practice under sub-section (1) of section 6
of that Act;
* * * * *
(41) “financial year”, in relation to any company or body corporate, means
the period ending on the 31st day of March every year, and where it has been
incorporated on or after the 1st day of January of a year, the period ending on
the 31st day of March of the following year, in respect whereof financial
statement of the company or body corporate is made up:
Provided that where a company or body corporate, which is a holding
company or a subsidiary or associate company of a company incorporated
outside India and is required to follow a different financial year for
consolidation of its accounts outside India, the Central Government may, on an
application made by that company or body corporate in such form and manner
as may be prescribed, allow any period as its financial year, whether or not that
period is a year:
Provided further that any application pending before the Tribunal as on
22 of 2019. the date of commencement of the Companies (Amendment) Act, 2019, shall
be disposed of by the Tribunal in accordance with the provisions applicable to
it before such commencement:
Provided also that a company or body corporate, existing on the
commencement of this Act, shall, within a period of two years from such
commencement, align its financial year as per the provisions of this clause;
* * * * *
(85) “small company” means a company, other than a public company,—
(i) paid-up share capital of which does not exceed fifty lakh rupees
or such higher amount as may be prescribed which shall not be more than
ten crore rupees; and
(ii) turnover of which as per profit and loss account for the
immediately preceding financial year does not exceed two crore rupees
or such higher amount as may be prescribed which shall not be more than
one hundred crore rupees:
Provided that nothing in this clause shall apply to—
(A) a holding company or a subsidiary company;
(B) a company registered under section 8; or
(C) a company or body corporate governed by any special Act;
* * * * *
74
Memorandum. 4. (1) * * * * *
(5) (i) Upon receipt of an application under sub-section (4), the Registrar may,
on the basis of information and documents furnished along with the application,
reserve the name for a period of twenty days from the date of approval or such other
period as may be prescribed:
Provided that in case of an application for reservation of name or for change
of its name by an existing company, the Registrar may reserve the name for a period
of sixty days from the date of approval.
(ii) Where after reservation of name under clause (i), it is found that name was
applied by furnishing wrong or incorrect information, then,—
(a) if the company has not been incorporated, the reserved name shall be
cancelled and the person making application under sub-section (4) shall be
liable to a penalty which may extend to one lakh rupees;
* * * * *
Incorporation of 7. (1) There shall be filed with the Registrar within whose jurisdiction the
company. registered office of a company is proposed to be situated, the following documents
and information for registration, namely:—
* * * * *
(b) a declaration in the prescribed form by an advocate, a chartered
accountant, cost accountant or company secretary in practice, who is engaged
in the formation of the company, and by a person named in the articles as a
director, manager or secretary of the company, that all the requirements of this
Act and the rules made thereunder in respect of registration and matters
precedent or incidental thereto have been complied with;
* * * * *
Service of 20. (1) * * * * *
documents.
(2) Save as provided in this Act or the rules made thereunder for filing of
documents with the Registrar in electronic mode, a document may be served on
Registrar or any member by sending it to him by post or by registered post or by
speed post or by courier or by delivering at his office or address, or by such
electronic or other mode as may be prescribed:
Provided that a member may request for delivery of any document through a
particular mode, for which he shall pay such fees as may be determined by the
company in its annual general meeting.
* * * * *
Power of 24. (1) * * * * *
Securities and
Exchange Board (2) The Securities and Exchange Board shall, in respect of matters specified in
to regulate issue sub-section (1) and the matters delegated to it under proviso to sub-section (1) of
and transfer of
section 458, exercise the powers conferred upon it under sub-sections (1), (2A), (3)
securities, etc.
and (4) of section 11, sections 11A, 11B and 11D of the Securities and Exchange
15 of 1992.
Board of India Act, 1992.
* * * * *
Matters to be
26. (1) * * * * *
stated in (9) If a prospectus is issued in contravention of the provisions of this section,
prospectus.
the company shall be punishable with fine which shall not be less than fifty thousand
rupees but which may extend to three lakh rupees and every person who is
knowingly a party to the issue of such prospectus shall be punishable with fine
which shall not be less than fifty thousand rupees but which may extend to three
lakh rupees.
* * * * *
75
40. (1) * * * * * Securities to be
dealt with in
(5) If a default is made in complying with the provisions of this section, the stock exchanges.
company shall be punishable with a fine which shall not be less than five lakh rupees
but which may extend to fifty lakh rupees and every officer of the company who is
in default shall be punishable or with fine which shall not be less than fifty thousand
rupees but which may extend to three lakh rupees.
* * * * *
PART II.—Private placement
42. (1) * * * * *
Issue of shares
on private
(2) A private placement shall be made only to a select group of persons who
placement basis.
have been identified by the Board (herein referred to as “identified persons”), whose
number shall not exceed fifty or such higher number as may be prescribed excluding
the qualified institutional buyers and employees of the company being offered
securities under a scheme of employees stock option in terms of provisions of
clause (b) of sub-section (1) of section 62, in a financial year subject to such
conditions as may be prescribed.
* * * * *
(10) Subject to sub-section (11), if a company makes an offer or accepts monies
in contravention of this section, the company, its promoters and directors shall be
liable for a penalty which may extend to the amount raised through the private
placement or two crore rupees, whichever is lower, and the company shall also
refund all monies with interest as specified in sub-section (6) to subscribers within
a period of thirty days of the order imposing the penalty.
* * * * *
62. (1) Where at any time, a company having a share capital proposes to Further issue of
increase its subscribed capital by the issue of further shares, such shares shall be share capital.
offered—
* * * * *
(b) to employees under a scheme of employees’ stock option, subject to
special resolution passed by company and subject to such conditions as may
be prescribed; or
* * * * *
68. (1) * * * * *
Power of
(2) No company shall purchase its own shares or other specified securities company to
purchase its own
under sub-section (1), unless—
securities.
* * * * *
(c) the buy-back is twenty-five per cent. or less of the aggregate of
paid-up capital and free reserves of the company:
Provided that in respect of the buy-back of equity shares in any financial
year, the reference to twenty-five per cent. in this clause shall be construed
with respect to its total paid-up equity capital in that financial year;
* * * * *
(g) the buy-back in respect of shares or other specified securities other
than those specified in clause (f) is in accordance with such rules as may be
prescribed:
Provided that no offer of buy-back under this sub-section shall be made
within a period of one year reckoned from the date of the closure of the
preceding offer of buy-back, if any.
* * * * *
76
(5) The buy-back under sub-section (1) may be—
* * * * *
(c) by purchasing the securities issued to employees of the company
pursuant to a scheme of stock option or sweat equity.
(6) Where a company proposes to buy-back its own shares or other specified
securities under this section in pursuance of a special resolution under clause (b) of
sub-section (2) or a resolution under item (ii) of the proviso thereto, it shall, before
making such buy-back, file with the Registrar and the Securities and Exchange
Board, a declaration of solvency signed by atleast two directors of the company, one
of whom shall be the managing director, if any, in such form as may be prescribed
and verified by an affidavit to the effect that the Board of Directors of the company
has made a full inquiry into the affairs of the company as a result of which they have
formed an opinion that it is capable of meeting its liabilities and will not be rendered
insolvent within a period of one year from the date of declaration adopted by the
Board:
Provided that no declaration of solvency shall be filed with the Securities and
Exchange Board by a company whose shares are not listed on any recognised stock
exchange.
* * * * *
(8) Where a company completes a buy-back of its shares or other specified
securities under this section, it shall not make a further issue of the same kind of
shares or other securities including allotment of new shares under clause (a) of
sub-section (1) of section 62 or other specified securities within a period of six
months except by way of a bonus issue or in the discharge of subsisting obligations
such as conversion of warrants, stock option schemes, sweat equity or conversion of
preference shares or debentures into equity shares.
* * * * *
(11) If a company makes any default in complying with the provisions of this
section or any regulation made by the Securities and Exchange Board, for the
purposes of clause (f) of sub-section (2), the company shall be punishable with fine
which shall not be less than one lakh rupees but which may extend to three lakh
rupees and every officer of the company who is in default shall be punishable with
fine which shall not be less than one lakh rupees but which may extend to three lakh
rupees.
Explanation I.—For the purposes of this section and section 70, “specified
securities” includes employees’ stock option or other securities as may be notified
by the Central Government from time to time.
* * * * *
CHAPTER VI
REGISTRATION OF CHARGES
Duty to register 77. (1) It shall be the duty of every company creating a charge within or outside
charges, etc. India, on its property or assets or any of its undertakings, whether tangible or
otherwise, and situated in or outside India, to register the particulars of the charge
signed by the company and the charge-holder together with the instruments, if any,
creating such charge in such form, on payment of such fees and in such manner as
may be prescribed, with the Registrar within thirty days of its creation:
* * * * *
Provided also that any subsequent registration of a charge shall not prejudice
any right acquired in respect of any property before the charge is actually registered:
77
* * * * *
99. If any default is made in holding a meeting of the company in accordance Punishment for
with section 96 or section 97 or section 98 or in complying with any directions of default in
complying with
the Tribunal, the company and every officer of the company who is in default shall
provisions of
be punishable with fine which may extend to one lakh rupees and in the case of a sections 96 to
continuing default, with a further fine which may extend to five thousand rupees for 98.
every day during which such default continues.
* * * * *
101. (1) A general meeting of a company may be called by giving not less than
Notice of
clear twenty-one days’ notice either in writing or through electronic mode in such meeting.
manner as may be prescribed:
Provided that a general meeting may be called after giving shorter notice than
that specified in this sub-section if consent, in writing or by electronic mode, is
accorded thereto—
(i) in the case of an annual general meeting, by not less than ninety-five
per cent. of the members entitled to vote thereat; and
(ii) in the case of any other general meeting, by members of the
company—
(a) holding, if the company has a share capital, majority in number
of members entitled to vote and who represent not less than ninety-five
per cent. of such part of the paid-up share capital of the company as
gives a right to vote at the meeting; or
(b) having, if the company has no share capital, not less than
ninety-five per cent. of the total voting power exercisable at that
meeting:
Provided further that where any member of a company is entitled to vote only
on some resolution or resolutions to be moved at a meeting and not on the others,
those members shall be taken into account for the purposes of this sub-section in
respect of the former resolution or resolutions and not in respect of the latter.
* * * * *
124. (1) * * * * * Unpaid
Dividend
(5) Any money transferred to the Unpaid Dividend Account of a company in Account.
pursuance of this section which remains unpaid or unclaimed for a period of seven
years from the date of such transfer shall be transferred by the company along with
interest accrued, if any, thereon to the Fund established under sub-section (1) of
section 125 and the company shall send a statement in the prescribed form of the
details of such transfer to the authority which administers the said Fund and that
authority shall issue a receipt to the company as evidence of such transfer.
(6) All shares in respect of which dividend has not been paid or claimed for
seven consecutive years or more shall be transferred by the company in the name of
Investor Education and Protection Fund along with a statement containing such
details as may be prescribed:
Provided that any claimant of shares transferred above shall be entitled to claim
the transfer of shares from Investor Education and Protection Fund in accordance
with such procedure and on submission of such documents as may be prescribed.
Explanation.—For the removal of doubts, it is hereby clarified that in case any
dividend is paid or claimed for any year during the said period of seven consecutive
years, the share shall not be transferred to Investor Education and Protection Fund.
* * * * *
78
Investor 125. (1) * * * * *
Education and
Protection Fund. (2) There shall be credited to the Fund—
* * * * *
(m) redemption amount of preference shares remaining unpaid or
unclaimed for seven or more years; and
* * * * *
(3) The Fund shall be utilised for—
(a) the refund in respect of unclaimed dividends, matured deposits,
matured debentures, the application money due for refund and interest
thereon;
* * * * *
(4) Any person claiming to be entitled to the amount referred in sub-section (2)
may apply to the authority constituted under sub-section (5) for the payment of the
money claimed.
* * * * *
CHAPTER IX
ACCOUNTS OF COMPANIES
128. (1) * * * * *
Books of
account, etc., to (6) If the managing director, the whole-time director in charge of finance, the
be kept by
Chief Financial Officer or any other person of a company charged by the Board with
company.
the duty of complying with the provisions of this section, contravenes such provisions,
such managing director, whole-time director in charge of finance, Chief Financial
Officer or such other person of the company shall be punishable with fine which shall
not be less than fifty thousand rupees but which may extend to five lakh rupees.
* * * * *
Voluntary 131. (1) If it appears to the directors of a company that—
revision of
(a) the financial statement of the company; or
financial
statements or (b) the report of the Board,
Board’s report.
do not comply with the provisions of section 129 or section 134 they may prepare
revised financial statement or a revised report in respect of any of the three
preceding financial years after obtaining approval of the Tribunal on an application
made by the company in such form and manner as may be prescribed and a copy of
the order passed by the Tribunal shall be filed with the Registrar:
Provided that the Tribunal shall give notice to the Central Government and the
Income-tax authorities and shall take into consideration the representations, if any, made
by that Government or the authorities before passing any order under this section:
Provided further that such revised financial statement or report shall not be
prepared or filed more than once in a financial year:
Provided also that the detailed reasons for revision of such financial statement
or report shall also be disclosed in the Board’s report in the relevant financial year
in which such revision is being made.
* * * * *
Constitution of 132. (1) * * * * *
National
(1A) The National Financial Reporting Authority shall perform its functions
Financial
Reporting through such divisions as may be prescribed.
Authority.
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in any other law for the time being in
force, the National Financial Reporting Authority shall—
(a) make recommendations to the Central Government on the
formulation and laying down of accounting and auditing policies and
standards for adoption by companies or class of companies or their auditors,
as the case may be;
79
* * * * *
(3A) Each division of the National Financial Reporting Authority shall be
presided over by the Chairperson or a full-time Member authorized by the
Chairperson.
* * * * *
(4) Notwithstanding anything contained in any other law for the time being in
force, the National Financial Reporting Authority shall—
(a) have the power to investigate, either suo motu or on a reference made
to it by the Central Government, for such class of bodies corporate or persons,
in such manners may be prescribed into the matters of professional or other
misconduct committed by any member or firm of chartered accountants,
38 of 1949. registered under the Chartered Accountants Act, 1949:
Provided that no other institute or body shall initiate or continue any
proceedings in such matters of misconduct where the National Financial
Reporting Authority has initiated an investigation under this section;
* * * * *
(c) where professional or other misconduct is proved, have the power to
make order for—
(A) imposing penalty of—
(I) not less than one lakh rupees, but which may extend to
five times of the fees received, in case of individuals; and
(II) not less than five lakh rupees, but which may extend to
ten times of the fees received, in case of firms;
(B) debarring the member or the firm from—
I. being appointed as an auditor or internal auditor or
undertaking any audit in respect of financial statements or
internal audit of the functions and activities of any company or
body corporate; or
II. performing any valuation as provided under section 247,
for a minimum period of six months or such higher period not exceeding
ten years as may be determined by the National Financial Reporting
Authority.
Explanation.—For the purposes of this sub-section, the expression
“professional or other misconduct” shall have the same meaning assigned to it
38 of 1949. under section 22 of the Chartered Accountants Act, 1949.
* * * * *
(10) The National Financial Reporting Authority shall meet at such times and
places and shall observe such rules of procedure in regard to the transaction of
business at its meetings in such manner as may be prescribed.
(11) The Central Government may appoint a secretary and such other
employees as it may consider necessary for the efficient performance of functions
by the National Financial Reporting Authority under this Act and the terms and
conditions of service of the secretary and employees shall be such as may be
prescribed.
* * * * *
80
135. (1) Every company having net worth of rupees five hundred crore or
Corporate Social
Responsibility. more, or turnover of rupees one thousand crore or more or a net profit of rupees five
crore or more during the immediately preceding financial years shall constitute a
Corporate Social Responsibility Committee of the Board consisting of three or more
directors, out of which at least one director shall be an independent director:
Provided that where a company is not required to appoint an independent
director under sub-section (4) of section 149, it shall have in its Corporate Social
Responsibility Committee two or more directors.
* * * * *
(6) Any amount remaining unspent under sub-section (5), pursuant to any
ongoing project, fulfilling such conditions as may be prescribed, undertaken by a
company in pursuance of its Corporate Social Responsibility Policy, shall be
transferred by the company within a period of thirty days from the end of the
financial year to a special account to be opened by the company in that behalf for
that financial year in any scheduled bank to be called the Unspent Corporate Social
Responsibility Account, and such amount shall be spent by the company in
pursuance of its obligation towards the Corporate Social Responsibility Policy
within a period of three financial years from the date of such transfer, failing which,
the company shall transfer the same to a Fund specified in Schedule VII, within a
period of thirty days from the date of completion of the third financial year.
* * * * *
(9) Where the amount to be spent by a company under sub-section (5) does not
exceed fifty lakh rupees, the requirement under sub-section (1) for constitution of
the Corporate Social Responsibility Committee shall not be applicable and the
functions of such Committee provided under this section shall, in such cases, be
discharged by the Board of Directors of such company.
* * * * *
Eligibility,
141. (1) A person shall be eligible for appointment as an auditor of a company
qualifications only if he is a chartered accountant:
and
disqualifications Provided that a firm whereof majority of partners practising in India are
of auditors.
qualified for appointment as aforesaid may be appointed by its firm name to be
auditor of a company.
* * * * *
144. An auditor appointed under this Act shall provide to the company only
Auditor not to
render certain such other services as are approved by the Board of Directors or the audit committee,
services. as the case may be, but which shall not include any of the following services
(whether such services are rendered directly or indirectly to the company), or its
holding company or subsidiary company, namely:—
(a) accounting and book keeping services;
(b) internal audit;
(c) design and implementation of any financial information system;
(d) actuarial services;
(e) investment advisory services;
(f) investment banking services;
(g) rendering of outsourced financial services;
(h) management services; and
81
(i) any other kind of services as may be prescribed:
Provided that an auditor or audit firm who or which has been performing any
non-audit services on or before the commencement of this Act shall comply with
the provisions of this section before the closure of the first financial year after the
date of such commencement.
Explanation.—For the purposes of this sub-section, the term “directly or
indirectly” shall include rendering of services by the auditor,—
(i) in case of auditor being an individual, either himself or through his
relative or any other person connected or associated with such individual or
through any other entity, whatsoever, in which such individual has
significant influence or control, or whose name or trade mark or brand is
used by such individual;
(ii) in case of auditor being a firm, either itself or through any of its
partners or through its parent, subsidiary or associate entity or through any
other entity, whatsoever, in which the firm or any partner of the firm has
significant influence or control, or whose name or trade mark or brand is
used by the firm or any of its partners.
* * * * *
147. (1) If any of the provisions of sections 139 to 146 (both inclusive) is Punishment for
contravened, the company shall be punishable with fine which shall not be less than contravention.
twenty-five thousand rupees but which may extend to five lakh rupees and every
officer of the company who is in default shall be punishable with fine which shall
not be less than ten thousand rupees but which may extend to one lakh rupees.
(2) If an auditor of a company contravenes any of the provisions of section 139,
section 143, section 144 or section 145, the auditor shall be punishable with fine
which shall not be less than twenty-five thousand rupees but which may extend to
five lakh rupees or four times the remuneration of the auditor, whichever is less:
Provided that if an auditor has contravened such provisions knowingly or
wilfully with the intention to deceive the company or its shareholders or creditors
or tax authorities, he shall be punishable with imprisonment for a term which may
extend to one year and with fine which shall not be less than fifty thousand rupees
but which may extend to twenty-five lakh rupees or eight times the remuneration of
the auditor, whichever is less.
* * * * *
148. (1) * * * * * Central
Government to
(3) The audit under sub-section (2) shall be conducted by a cost accountant specify audit of
items of cost in
who shall be appointed by the Board on such remuneration as may be determined
respect of certain
by the members in such manner as may be prescribed: companies.
Provided that no person appointed under section 139 as an auditor of the
company shall be appointed for conducting the audit of cost records:
Provided further that the auditor conducting the cost audit shall comply with
the cost auditing standards.
Explanation.—For the purposes of this sub-section, the expression “cost
auditing standards” mean such standards as are issued by the Institute of Cost
23 of 1959.
Accountants of India, constituted under the Cost and Works Accountants Act, 1959,
with the approval of the Central Government.
* * * * *
82
(8) If any default is made in complying with the provisions of this section,—
(a) the company and every officer of the company who is in default shall
be punishable in the manner as provided in sub-section (1) of section 147;
(b) the cost auditor of the company who is in default shall be punishable
in the manner as provided in sub-sections (2) to (4) of section 147.
CHAPTER XI
APPOINTMENT AND QUALIFICATIONS OF DIRECTORS
Company to 149. (1) * * * * *
have Board of
Directors. (6) An independent director in relation to a company, means a director other
than managing director or a whole-time director or a nominee director,—
* * * * *
(e) who, neither himself nor any of his relatives—
(i) holds or has held the position of a key managerial personnel or
is or has been employee of the company or its holding, subsidiary or
associate company in any of the three financial years immediately
preceding the financial year in which he is proposed to be appointed:
Provided that in case of a relative who is an employee, the
restriction under this clause shall not apply for his employment during
preceding three financial years;
(ii) is or has been an employee or proprietor or a partner, in any of
the three financial years immediately preceding the financial year in
which he is proposed to be appointed, of—
(A) a firm of auditors or company secretaries in practice or
cost auditors of the company or its holding, subsidiary or
associate company; or
(B) any legal or a consulting firm that has or had any
transaction with the company, its holding, subsidiary or
associate company amounting to ten per cent. or more of the
gross turnover of such firm;
* * * * *
(11) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (10), no independent
director shall hold office for more than two consecutive terms, but such independent
director shall be eligible for appointment after the expiration of three years of
ceasing to become an independent director:
Provided that an independent director shall not, during the said period of three
years, be appointed in or be associated with the company in any other capacity,
either directly or indirectly.
Explanation.—For the purposes of sub-sections (10) and (11), any tenure of an
independent director on the date of commencement of this Act shall not be counted
as a term under those sub-sections.
* * * * *
83
152. (1) * * * * * Appointment of
directors.
(3) No person shall be appointed as a director of a company unless he has been
allotted the Director Identification Number under section 154 or any other number
as may be prescribed under section 153.
* * * * *
154. The Central Government shall, within one month from the receipt of the Allotment of
Director
application under section 153, allot a Director Identification Number to an applicant
Identification
in such manner as may be prescribed. Number.
* * * * *
159. If any individual or director of a company makes any default in complying Penalty for
with any of the provisions of section 152, section 155 and section 156, such default of certain
provisions.
individual or director of the company shall be liable to a penalty which may extend
to fifty thousand rupees and where the default is a continuing one, with a further
penalty which may extend to five hundred rupees for each day after the first during
which such default continues.
* * * * *
161. (1) The articles of a company may confer on its Board of Directors the Appointment of
additional
power to appoint any person, other than a person who fails to get appointed as a
director,
director in a general meeting, as an additional director at any time who shall hold alternate director
office up to the date of the next annual general meeting or the last date on which the and nominee
annual general meeting should have been held, whichever is earlier. director.
* * * * *
(4) If the office of any director appointed by the company in general meeting
is vacated before his term of office expires in the normal course, the resulting casual
vacancy may, in default of and subject to any regulations in the articles of the
company, be filled by the Board of Directors at a meeting of the Board which shall
be subsequently approved by members in the immediate next general meeting:
Provided that any person so appointed shall hold office only up to the date up
to which the director in whose place he is appointed would have held office if it had
not been vacated.
* * * * *
164. (1) A person shall not be eligible for appointment as a director of a Disqualifications
company, if— for appointment
of director.
* * * * *
(g) he has been convicted of the offence dealing with related party
transactions under section 188 at any time during the last preceding
five years; or
(h) he has not complied with sub-section (3) of section 152.
* * * * *
(2) No person who is or has been a director of a company which—
(a) has not filed financial statements or annual returns for any continuous
period of three financial years; or
(b) has failed to repay the deposits accepted by it or pay interest thereon
or to redeem any debentures on the due date or pay interest due thereon or pay
any dividend declared and such failure to pay or redeem continues for one year
or more,
shall be eligible to be re-appointed as a director of that company or appointed in
other company for a period of five years from the date on which the said company
fails to do so:
Provided that where a person is appointed as a director of a company which is
in default of clause (a) or clause (b), he shall not incur the disqualification for a
period of six months from the date of his appointment.
84
* * * * *
Number of 165. (1) No person, after the commencement of this Act, shall hold office as a
directorships. director, including any alternate directorship, in more than twenty companies at the
same time:
Provided that the maximum number of public companies in which a person can
be appointed as a director shall not exceed ten.
* * * * *
Explanation II.—For reckoning the limit of directorships of twenty companies,
the directorship in a dormant company shall not be included.
* * * * *
Duties of 166. (1) * * * * *
directors.
(7) If a director of the company contravenes the provisions of this section such
director shall be punishable with fine which shall not be less than one lakh rupees
but which may extend to five lakh rupees.
Vacation of 167. (1) The office of a director shall become vacant in case—
office of
(a) he incurs any of the disqualifications specified in section 164:
director.
Provided that where he incurs disqualification under sub-section (2) of
section 164, the office of the director shall become vacant in all the companies,
other than the company which is in default under that sub-section;
* * * * *
(2) If a person, functions as a director even when he knows that the office of
director held by him has become vacant on account of any of the disqualifications
specified in sub-section (1), he shall be punishable with fine which shall not be less
than one lakh rupees but which may extend to five lakh rupees.
* * * * *
CHAPTER XII
MEETINGS OF BOARD AND ITS POWERS
Meetings of 173. (1) * * * * *
Board.
(5) A One Person Company, small company and dormant company shall be
deemed to have complied with the provisions of this section if at least one meeting
of the Board of Directors has been conducted in each half of a calendar year and the
gap between the two meetings is not less than ninety days:
Provided that nothing contained in this sub-section and in section 174 shall
apply to One Person Company in which there is only one director on its Board of
Directors.
* * * * *
Disclosure of 184. (1) Every director shall at the first meeting of the Board in which he
interest by participates as a director and thereafter at the first meeting of the Board in every financial
director.
year or whenever there is any change in the disclosures already made, then at the first
Board meeting held after such change, disclose his concern or interest in any company
or companies or bodies corporate, firms, or other association of individuals which shall
include the shareholding, in such manner as may be prescribed.
* * * * *
Loans to 185. (1) No company shall, directly or indirectly, advance any loan, including
directors, etc. any loan represented by a book debt to, or give any guarantee or provide any security
in connection with any loan taken by,—
* * * * *
(b) any firm in which any such director or relative is a partner.
* * * * *
85
186. (1) * * * * * Loan and
investment by
(13) If a company contravenes the provisions of this section, the company shall company.
be punishable with fine which shall not be less than twenty-five thousand rupees but
which may extend to five lakh rupees and every officer of the company who is in
default shall be punishable with imprisonment for a term which may extend to two
years and with fine which shall not be less than twenty-five thousand rupees but
which may extend to one lakh rupees.
Explanation.—For the purposes of this section,—
(a) the expression “investment company” means a company whose
principal business is the acquisition of shares, debentures or other securities
and a company will be deemed to be principally engaged in the business of
acquisition of shares, debentures or other securities, if its assets in the form of
investment in shares, debentures or other securities constitute not less than
fifty per cent. of its total assets, or if its income derived from investment
business constitutes not less than fifty per cent. as a proportion of its gross
income;
(b) the expression “infrastructure facilities” means the facilities specified
in Schedule VI.
* * * * *
204. (1) Every listed company and a company belonging to other class of Secretarial audit
companies as may be prescribed shall annex with its Board’s report made in terms for bigger
companies.
of sub-section (3) of section 134, a secretarial audit report, given by a company
secretary in practice, in such form as may be prescribed.
(2) It shall be the duty of the company to give all assistance and facilities to the
company secretary in practice, for auditing the secretarial and related records of the
company.
(3) The Board of Directors, in their report made in terms of sub-section (3) of
section 134, shall explain in full any qualification or observation or other remarks
made by the company secretary in practice in his report under sub-section (1).
(4) If a company or any officer of the company or the company secretary in
practice, contravenes the provisions of this section, the company, every officer of
the company or the company secretary in practice, who is in default, shall be liable
to a penalty of two lakh rupees.
* * * * *
CHAPTER XIV
INSPECTION, INQUIRY AND INVESTIGATION
206. (1) * * * * * Power to call for
information,
(7) If a company fails to furnish any information or explanation or produce any inspect books
document required under this section, the company and every officer of the and conduct
company, who is in default shall be punishable with a fine which may extend to one inquiries.
lakh rupees and in the case of a continuing failure, with an additional fine which
may extend to five hundred rupees for everyday after the first during which the
failure continues.
* * * * *
222. (1) Where it appears to the Tribunal, in connection with any investigation Imposition of
under section 216 or on a complaint made by any person in this behalf, that there is restrictions upon
securities.
good reason to find out the relevant facts about any securities issued or to be issued
by a company and the Tribunal is of the opinion that such facts cannot be found out
unless certain restrictions, as it may deem fit, are imposed, the Tribunal may, by
order, direct that the securities shall be subject to such restrictions as it may deem
fit for such period not exceeding three years as may be specified in the order.
86
(2) Where securities in any company are issued or transferred or acted upon in
contravention of an order of the Tribunal under sub-section (1), the company shall
be punishable with fine which shall not be less than one lakh rupees but which may
extend to twenty-five lakh rupees and every officer of the company who is in default
shall be punishable with imprisonment for a term which may extend to six months
or with fine which shall not be less than twenty-five thousand rupees but which may
extend to five lakh rupees, or with both.
* * * * *
CHAPTER XV
COMPROMISES, ARRANGEMENTS AND AMALGAMATIONS
Power to 230. (1) Where a compromise or arrangement is proposed—
compromise or
make (a) between a company and its creditors or any class of them; or
arrangements
with creditors (b) between a company and its members or any class of them,
and members.
the Tribunal may, on the application of the company or of any creditor or member
of the company, or in the case of a company which is being wound up, of the
liquidator, appointed under this Act or under the Insolvency and Bankruptcy
Code, 2016, as the case may be, order a meeting of the creditors or class of creditors, 31 of 2016.
or of the members or class of members, as the case may be, to be called, held and
conducted in such manner as the Tribunal directs.
Explanation.—For the purposes of this sub-section, arrangement includes a
reorganisation of the company’s share capital by the consolidation of shares of
different classes or by the division of shares into shares of different classes, or by
both of those methods.
* * * * *
(6) Where, at a meeting held in pursuance of sub-section (1), majority of
persons representing three-fourths in value of the creditors, or class of creditors or
members or class of members, as the case may be, voting in person or by proxy or
by postal ballot, agree to any compromise or arrangement and if such compromise
or arrangement is sanctioned by the Tribunal by an order, the same shall be binding
on the company, all the creditors, or class of creditors or members or class of
members, as the case may be, or, in case of a company being wound up, on the
liquidator appointed under this act or under the Insolvency and Bankruptcy
Code, 2016, as the case may be, and the contributories of the company. 31 of 2016.
* * * * *
Merger and 232. (1) * * * * *
amalgamation of
companies. (3) The Tribunal, after satisfying itself that the procedure specified in
sub-sections (1) and (2) has been complied with, may, by order, sanction the
compromise or arrangement or by a subsequent order, make provision for the
following matters, namely:—
* * * * *
(b) the allotment or appropriation by the transferee company of any
shares, debentures, policies or other like instruments in the company which,
under the compromise or arrangement, are to be allotted or appropriated by
that company to or for any person:
Provided that a transferee company shall not, as a result of the
compromise or arrangement, hold any shares in its own name or in the name
of any trust whether on its behalf or on behalf of any of its subsidiary or
associate companies and any such shares shall be cancelled or extinguished;
* * * * *
87
233. (1) Notwithstanding the provisions of section 230 and section 232, a Merger or
amalgamation of
scheme of merger or amalgamation may be entered into between two or more small
certain
companies or between a holding company and its wholly-owned subsidiary
companies.
company or such other class or classes of companies as may be prescribed, subject
to the following, namely:—
* * * * *
(b) the objections and suggestions received are considered by the
companies in their respective general meetings and the scheme is approved by
the respective members or class of members at a general meeting holding at
least ninety per cent. of the total number of shares;
* * * * *
(d) the scheme is approved by majority representing nine-tenths in value
of the creditors or class of creditors of respective companies indicated in a
meeting convened by the company by giving a notice of twenty-one days along
with the scheme to its creditors for the purpose or otherwise approved in writing.
(2) The transferee company shall file a copy of the scheme so approved in the
manner as may be prescribed, with the Central Government, Registrar and the
Official Liquidator where the registered office of the company is situated.
* * * * *
(13) The Central Government may provide for the merger or amalgamation of
companies in such manner as may be prescribed.
* * * * *
242. (1) * * * * * Powers of
Tribunal.
(8) If a company contravenes the provisions of sub-section (5), the company
shall be punishable with fine which shall not be less than one lakh rupees but which
may extend to twenty-five lakh rupees and every officer of the company who is in
default shall be punishable with fine which shall not be less than twenty-five
thousand rupees but which may extend to one lakh rupees.
* * * * *
245. (1) Such number of member or members, depositor or depositors or any Class action.
class of them, as the case may be, as are indicated in sub-section (2) may, if they are
of the opinion that the management or conduct of the affairs of the company are
being conducted in a manner prejudicial to the interests of the company or its
members or depositors, file an application before the Tribunal on behalf of the
members or depositors for seeking all or any of the following orders, namely:—
(a) to restrain the company from committing an act which is ultra vires
the articles or memorandum of the company;
(b) to restrain the company from committing breach of any provision of
the company’s memorandum or articles;
(c) to declare a resolution altering the memorandum or articles of the
company as void if the resolution was passed by suppression of material facts
or obtained by mis-statement to the members or depositors;
(d) to restrain the company and its directors from acting on such
resolution;
(e) to restrain the company from doing an act which is contrary to the
provisions of this Act or any other law for the time being in force;
(f) to restrain the company from taking action contrary to any resolution
passed by the members;
88
(g) to claim damages or compensation or demand any other suitable
action from or against—
(i) the company or its directors for any fraudulent, unlawful or
wrongful act or omission or conduct or any likely act or omission or
conduct on its or their part;
(ii) the auditor including audit firm of the company for any
improper or misleading statement of particulars made in his audit report
or for any fraudulent, unlawful or wrongful act or conduct; or
(iii) any expert or advisor or consultant or any other person for any
incorrect or misleading statement made to the company or for any
fraudulent, unlawful or wrongful act or conduct or any likely act or
conduct on his part;
(h) to seek any other remedy as the Tribunal may deem fit.
* * * * *
CHAPTER XVII
REGISTERED VALUERS
Valuation by 247. (1) Where a valuation is required to be made in respect of any
registered property, stocks, shares, debentures, securities or goodwill or any other assets
valuers.
(herein referred to as the assets) or net worth of a company or its liabilities under
the provision of this Act, it shall be valued by a person having such qualifications
and experience, registered as a valuer and being a member of an organisation
recognised, in such manner, on such terms and conditions as may be prescribed and
appointed by the audit committee or in its absence by the Board of Directors of that
company.
(2) The valuer appointed under sub-section (1) shall,—
* * * * *
(c) make the valuation in accordance with such rules as may be
prescribed; and
(3) If a valuer contravenes the provisions of this section or the rules made
thereunder, the valuer shall be liable to a penalty of fifty thousand rupees:
Provided that if the valuer has contravened such provisions with the intention
to defraud the company or its members, he shall be punishable with imprisonment
for a term which may extend to one year and with fine which shall not be less than
one lakh rupees but which may extend to five lakh rupees.
(4) Where a valuer has been convicted under sub-section (3), he shall be
liable to—
(i) refund the remuneration received by him to the company; and
(ii) pay for damages to the company or to any other person for loss
arising out of incorrect or misleading statements of particulars made in his
report.
* * * * *
CHAPTER XVIII
REMOVAL OF NAMES OF COMPANIES FROM THE REGISTER OF COMPANIES
Power of 248. (1) Where the Registrar has reasonable cause to believe that—
Registrar to
remove name of * * * * *
company from
register of
companies.
89
(c) a company is not carrying on any business or operation for a period
of two immediately preceding financial years and has not made any
application within such period for obtaining the status of a dormant company
under section 455; or
* * * * *
(2) Without prejudice to the provisions of sub-section (1), a company may,
after extinguishing all its liabilities, by a special resolution or consent of
seventy-five per cent. members in terms of paid-up share capital, file an application
in the prescribed manner to the Registrar for removing the name of the company
from the register of companies on all or any of the grounds specified in
sub-section (1) and the Registrar shall, on receipt of such application, cause a public
notice to be issued in the prescribed manner:
Provided that in the case of a company regulated under a special Act, approval
of the regulatory body constituted or established under that Act shall also be
obtained and enclosed with the application.
* * * * *
(5) At the expiry of the time mentioned in the notice, the Registrar may, unless
cause to the contrary is shown by the company, strike off its name from the register
of companies, and shall publish notice thereof in the Official Gazette, and on the
publication in the Official Gazette of this notice, the company shall stand dissolved.
(6) The Registrar, before passing an order under sub-section (5), shall satisfy
himself that sufficient provision has been made for the realisation of all amount due
to the company and for the payment or discharge of its liabilities and obligations by
the company within a reasonable time and, if necessary, obtain necessary
undertakings from the managing director, director or other persons in charge of the
management of the company:
Provided that notwithstanding the undertakings referred to in this sub-section,
the assets of the company shall be made available for the payment or discharge of
all its liabilities and obligations even after the date of the order removing the name
of the company from the register of companies.
* * * * *
249. (1) * * * * * Restrictions on
making
(2) If a company files an application under sub-section (2) of section 248 in application
under
violation of sub-section (1), it shall be punishable with fine which may extend to
section 248 in
one lakh rupees. certain
situations.
* * * * *
252. (1) Any person aggrieved by an order of the Registrar, notifying a Appeal to
company as dissolved under section 248, may file an appeal to the Tribunal within Tribunal.
a period of three years from the date of the order of the Registrar and if the Tribunal
is of the opinion that the removal of the name of the company from the register of
companies is not justified in view of the absence of any of the grounds on which the
order was passed by the Registrar, it may order restoration of the name of the
company in the register of companies:
Provided that before passing any order under this section, the Tribunal shall
give a reasonable opportunity of making representations and of being heard to the
Registrar, the company and all the persons concerned:
90
Provided further that if the Registrar is satisfied, that the name of the company
has been struck off from the register of companies either inadvertently or on the
basis of incorrect information furnished by the company or its directors, which
requires restoration in the register of companies, he may within a period of three
years from the date of passing of the order dissolving the company under
section 248, file an application before the Tribunal seeking restoration of name of
such company.
(2) A copy of the order passed by the Tribunal shall be filed by the company
with the Registrar within thirty days from the date of the order and on receipt of the
order, the Registrar shall cause the name of the company to be restored in the register
of companies and shall issue a fresh certificate of incorporation.
* * * * *
PART I.—Winding up by the Tribunal
271. A company may, on a petition under section 272, be wound up by the
Circumstances
in which Tribunal,—
company may be
wound up by (a) if the company has, by special resolution, resolved that the company
Tribunal.
be wound up by the Tribunal;
* * * * *
(c) if on an application made by the Registrar or any other person
authorised by the Central Government by notification under this Act, the
Tribunal is of the opinion that the affairs of the company have been conducted
in a fraudulent manner or the company was formed for fraudulent and unlawful
purpose or the persons concerned in the formation or management of its affairs
have been guilty of fraud, misfeasance or misconduct in connection therewith
and that it is proper that the company be wound up;
* * * * *
Summary 361. (1) Where the company to be wound up under this Chapter,—
procedure for
liquidation. (i) has assets of book value not exceeding one crore rupees; and
* * * * *
(2) Where an order under sub-section (1) is made, the Central Government
shall appoint the Official Liquidator as the liquidator of the company.
* * * * *
(5) On receipt of the report under sub-section (4), if the Central Government is
satisfied that any fraud has been committed by the promoters, directors or any other
officer of the company, it may direct further investigation into the affairs of the
company and that a report shall be submitted within such time as may be specified.
(6) After considering the investigation report under sub-section (5), the Central
Government may order that winding up may be proceeded under Part I of this
Chapter or under the provision of this Part.
* * * * *
Order of 365. (1) * * * * *
dissolution of
company. (3) Where an order is made under sub-section (2), the Registrar shall strike off
the name of the company from the register of companies and publish a notification
to this effect.
91
CHAPTER XXI
PART I.—Companies Authorised to Register under this Act
366. (1) For the purposes of this Part, the word “company” includes any Companies
partnership firm, limited liability partnership, cooperative society, society or any capable of being
registered.
other business entity formed under any other law for the time being in force which
applies for registration under this Part.
* * * * *
374. Every company which is seeking registration under this Part shall,— Obligations of
companies
* * * * * registering under
this Part.
(c) file an affidavit, duly not arised, from all the members or partners to provide
that in the event of registration under this Part, necessary documents or papers shall
be submitted to the registering or other authority with which the company was
earlier registered, for its dissolution as partnership firm, limited liability partnership,
cooperative society, society or any other business entity, as the case may be.
* * * * *
378P. (1) * * * * * Appointment of
directors.
(2) The election of directors shall be conducted within a period of ninety days
of the registration of the Producer Company:
Provided that in the case of an inter-State co-operative society which has been
registered as a Producer Company under sub-section (4) of section 378J in which at
least five directors including the directors continuing in office under sub-section (1)
of section 378N hold office as such on the date of registration of such company, the
provisions of this sub-section shall have effect as if for the words “ninety days”, the
words “three hundred and sixty-five days” had been substituted.
* * * * *
(5) Save as otherwise provided in sub-section (2), the directors of the Board
shall be elected or appointed by the Members in the annual general meeting.
* * * * *
378Q. (1) The office of the director of a Producer Company shall become
Vacation of
vacant if,— office by
directors.
* * * * *
(b) the Producer Company, in which he is a director, has made a default
in repayment of any advances or loans taken from any company or institution
or any other person and such default continues for ninety days;
* * * * *
378Y. Unless the articles require a larger number, one-fourth of the total Quorum.
membership shall constitute the quorum at a general meeting.
* * * * *
PART IV
GENERAL MEETINGS
378ZA. (1) Every Producer Company shall in each year, hold, in addition to Annual general
any other meetings, a general meeting, as its annual general meeting and shall meetings.
specify the meeting as such in the notices calling it, and not more than fifteen months
shall elapse between the date of one annual general meeting of a Producer Company
and that of the next:
92
Provided that the Registrar may, for any special reason, permit extension of
the time for holding any annual general meeting (not being the first annual general
meeting) by a period not exceeding three months.
(2) A Producer Company shall hold its first annual general meeting within a
period of ninety days from the date of its incorporation.
(3) The Members shall adopt the articles of the Producer Company and appoint
directors of its Board in the annual general meeting.
* * * * *
(9) Unless the articles of the Producer Company provide for a larger number,
one-fourth of the total number of members of the Producer Company shall be the
quorum for its annual general meeting.
* * * * *
Internal audit. 378ZF. Every Producer Company shall have internal audit of its accounts
carried out, at such interval and in such manner as may be specified in articles, by a
chartered accountant as defined in clause (b) of sub-section (1) of section 2 of the
Chartered Accountants Act, 1949. 38 of 1949.
* * * * *
PART VIII
PENALTIES
378ZM. (1) If any person, other than a Producer Company registered under
Penalty for
contravention. this Chapter, carries on business under any name which contains the words
“Producer Company Limited”, he shall be punishable with fine which may extend
to ten thousand rupees for every day during which such name has been used by him.
(2) If a director or an officer of a Producer Company, who wilfully fails to
furnish any information relating to the affairs of the Producer Company required by
a Member or a person duly authorised in this behalf, he shall be liable to
imprisonment for a term which may extend to six months and with fine equivalent
to five per cent. of the turnover of that Company during the preceding financial year.
(3) If a director or officer of a Producer Company—
(a) fails to hand over the custody of books of account and other
documents or property in his custody to the Producer Company of which he is
a director or officer; or
(b) fails to convene annual general meeting or other general meetings,
he shall be punishable with fine which may extend to one lakh rupees, and in the
case of a continuing default or failure, with an additional fine which may extend to
ten thousand rupees for every day during which such default or failure continues.
* * * * *
PART XII
RE-CONVERSION OF PRODUCER COMPANY TO INTER-STATE CO-OPERATIVE SOCIETY
Re-conversion 378ZS. (1) * * * * *
of Producer
Company to (6) If default is made in complying with sub-section (4), the company, and
inter-State every officer of the company who is in default, shall be punishable with fine which
co-operative
may extend to one hundred rupees, for each copy in respect of which default is made.
society.
* * * * *
93
392. Without prejudice to the provisions of section 391, if a foreign company Punishment for
contravention.
contravenes the provisions of this Chapter, the foreign company shall be punishable
with fine which shall not be less than one lakh rupees but which may extend to three
lakh rupees and in the case of a continuing offence, with an additional fine which
may extend to fifty thousand rupees for every day after the first during which the
contravention continues and every officer of the foreign company who is in default
shall be punishable with fine which shall not be less than twenty-five thousand
rupees but which may extend to five lakh rupees.
* * * * *
CHAPTER XXIV
REGISTRATION OFFICES AND FEES
396. (1) * * * * * Registration
offices.
(2) The Central Government may appoint such Registrars, Additional, Joint,
Deputy and Assistant Registrars as it considers necessary for the registration of
companies and discharge of various functions under this Act, and the powers and
duties that may be exercisable by such officers shall be such as may be prescribed.
* * * * *
403. (1) Any document, required to be submitted, filed, registered or recorded, Fee for filing,
or any fact or information required or authorised to be registered under this Act, etc.
shall be submitted, filed, registered or recorded within the time specified in the
relevant provision on payment of such fee as may be prescribed:
Provided that where any document, fact or information required to be
submitted, filed, registered or recorded, as the case may be, under section 92 or 137
is not submitted, filed, registered or recorded, as the case may be, within the period
provided in those sections, without prejudice to any other legal action or liability
under this Act, it may be submitted, filed, registered or recorded, as the case may
be, after expiry of the period so provided in those sections, on payment of such
additional fee as may be prescribed, which shall not be less than one hundred rupees
per day and different amounts may be prescribed for different classes of companies:
Provided further that where the document, fact or information, as the case may
be, in cases other than referred to in the first proviso, is not submitted, filed,
registered or recorded, as the case may be, within the period provided in the relevant
section, it may, without prejudice to any other legal action or liability under this Act,
be submitted, filed, registered or recorded as the case may be, on payment of such
additional fee as may be prescribed and different fees may be prescribed for different
classes of companies:
* * * * *
410. The Central Government shall, by notification, constitute, with effect Constitution of
from such date as may be specified therein, an Appellate Tribunal to be known as Appellate
the National Company Law Appellate Tribunal consisting of a chairperson and such
Tribunal.
number of Judicial and Technical Members, as the Central Government may deem
fit, to be appointed by it by notification, for hearing appeals against—
(a) the orders of the Tribunal or of the National Financial Reporting Authority
under this Act; and
* * * * *
419. (1) * * * * * Benches of
Tribunal.
(4) The Central Government shall, by notification, establish such number of
benches of the Tribunal, as it may consider necessary, to exercise the jurisdiction,
powers and authority of the Adjudicating Authority conferred on such Tribunal by
31 of 2016. or under Part II of the Insolvency and Bankruptcy Code, 2016.
94
* * * * *
Compounding of 441. (1) Notwithstanding anything contained in the Code of Criminal
certain offences. Procedure, 1973, any offence punishable under this Act (whether committed by a 2 of 1974.
company or any officer thereof) not being an offence punishable with imprisonment
only, or punishable with imprisonment and also with fine, may, either before or after
the institution of any prosecution, be compounded by—
* * * * *
(b) where the maximum amount of fine which may be imposed for such
offence does not exceed twenty-five lakh rupees, by the Regional Director or
any officer authorised by the Central Government, on payment or credit, by
the company or, as the case may be, the officer, to the Central Government of
such sum as that Tribunal or the Regional Director or any officer authorised
by the Central Government, as the case may be, may specify:
Provided that the sum so specified shall not, in any case, exceed the
maximum amount of the fine which may be imposed for the offence so
compounded:
Provided further that in specifying the sum required to be paid or
credited for the compounding of an offence under this sub-section, the sum, if
any, paid by way of additional fee under sub-section (2) of section 403 shall
be taken into account:
Provided also that any offence covered under this sub-section by any
company or its officer shall not be compounded if the investigation against
such company has been initiated or is pending under this Act.
* * * * *
Lesser penalties 446B. Notwithstanding anything contained in this Act, if penalty is payable
for certain for non-compliance of any of the provisions of this Act by a One Person Company,
companies.
small company, start-up company or Producer Company, or by any of its officer in
default, or any other person in respect of such company, then such company, its
officer in default or any other person, as the case may be, shall be liable to a penalty
which shall not be more than one-half of the penalty specified in such provisions
subject to a maximum of two lakh rupees in case of a company and one lakh rupees
in case of an officer who is in default or any other person, as the case may be.
Explanation.—For the purposes of this section,—
(a) “Producer Company” means a company as defined in clause (l) of
section 378A;
(b) “start-up company” means a private company incorporated under this
Act or under the Companies Act, 1956 and recognised as start-up in 1 of 1956.
accordance with the notification issued by the Central Government in the
Department for Promotion of Industry and Internal Trade.
CHAPTER XXIX
MISCELLANEOUS
Punishment for 447. Without prejudice to any liability including repayment of any debt under
fraud. this Actor any other law for the time being in force, any person who is found to be
guilty of fraud, involving an amount of at least ten lakh rupees or one per cent. of
the turnover of the company, whichever is lower shall be punishable with
imprisonment for a term which shall not be less than six months but which may
extend to ten years and shall also be liable to fine which shall not be less than the
amount involved in the fraud, but which may extend to three times the amount
involved in the fraud:
* * * * *
95
Provided further that where the fraud involves an amount less than ten lakh
rupees or one per cent. of the turnover of the company, whichever is lower, and does
not involve public interest, any person guilty of such fraud shall be punishable with
imprisonment for a term which may extend to five years or with fine which may
extend to fifty lakh rupees or with both.
* * * * *
453. If any person or persons trade or carry on business under any name or Punishment for
title, of which the word “Limited” or the words “Private Limited” or any contraction improper use of
“Limited” or
or imitation thereof is or are the last word or words, that person or each of those
“Private
persons shall, unless duly incorporated with limited liability, or unless duly Limited”.
incorporated as a private company with limited liability, as the case may be,
punishable with fine which shall not be less than five hundred rupees but may extend
to two thousand rupees for every day for which that name or title has been used.
454. (1) The Central Government may, by an order published in the Official Adjudication of
penalties.
Gazette, appoint as many officers of the Central Government, not below the rank of
Registrar, as adjudicating officers for adjudging penalty under the provisions of this
Act in the manner as may be prescribed.
* * * * *
(5) Any person aggrieved by an order made by the adjudicating officer under
sub-section (3) may prefer an appeal to the Regional Director having jurisdiction in
the matter.
* * * * *
(7) The Regional Director may, after giving the parties to the appeal an
opportunity of being heard, pass such order as he thinks fit, confirming, modifying
or setting aside the order appealed against.
(8)(i) Where company fails to comply with the order made under
sub-section (3) or sub-section (7), as the case may be, within a period of ninety days
from the date of the receipt of the copy of the order, the company shall be punishable
with fine which shall not be less than twenty-five thousand rupees but which may
extend to five lakh rupees.
(ii) Where an officer of a company or any other person who is in default fails
to comply with the order made under sub-section (3) or sub-section (7), as the case
may be, within a period of ninety days from the date of the receipt of the copy of
the order, such officer shall be punishable with imprisonment which may extend to
six months or with fine which shall not be less than twenty-five thousand rupees but
which may extend to one lakh rupees, or with both.
454A. Where a company or an officer of a company or any other person Penalty for
having already been subjected to penalty for default under any provisions of this repeated default.
Act, again commits such default within a period of three years from the date of order
imposing such penalty passed by the adjudicating officer or the Regional Director,
as the case may be, it or he shall be liable for the second or subsequent defaults for
an amount equal to twice the amount of penalty provided for such default under the
relevant provisions of this Act.
455. (1) Where a company is formed and registered under this Act for a future Dormant
project or to hold an asset or intellectual property and has no significant accounting company.
transaction, such a company or an inactive company may make an application to the
Registrar in such manner as may be prescribed for obtaining the status of a dormant
company.
Explanation.—For the purposes of this section,—
(i) “inactive company” means a company which has not been carrying
on any business or operation, or has not made any significant accounting
transaction during the last two financial years, or has not filed financial
statements and annual returns during the last two financial years;
96
(ii) “significant accounting transaction” means any transaction other
than—
* * * * *
(c) allotment of shares to fulfil the requirements of this Act; and
(d) payments for maintenance of its office and records.
* * * * *
Non-disclosure 457. Notwithstanding anything contained in any other law for the time being
of information in in force, the Registrar, any officer of the Government or any other person shall not
certain cases.
be compelled to disclose to any court, Tribunal or other authority, the source from
where he got any information which—
(a) has led the Central Government to order an investigation under
section 210; or
* * * * *
Power of Central 469. (1) * * * * *
Government to
make rules. (3) Any rule made under sub-section (1) may provide that a contravention
thereof shall be punishable with fine which may extend to five thousand rupees and
where the contravention is a continuing one, with a further fine which may extend
to five hundred rupees for every day after the first during which such contravention
continues.
* * * * *
LOK SABHA
————
A
BILL
further to amend the Limited Liability Partnership Act, 2008 and the Companies
Act, 2013.
————
(Smt. Nirmala Sitharaman, Minister of Finance and Corporate Affairs)
