AS INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA
Bill No. 97 of 2026
THE FOREIGN CONTRIBUTION (REGULATION) AMENDMENT
BILL, 2026
A
BILL
further to amend the Foreign Contribution (Regulation) Act, 2010.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Seventy-seventh Year of the Republic of
India as follows:––
1. (1) This Act may be called the Foreign Contribution (Regulation) Short title and
commencement.
Amendment Act, 2026.
5 (2) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by
notification in the Official Gazette, appoint:
Provided that different dates may be appointed for different provisions of
this Act, and any reference in any such provision to the commencement of this
Act, shall be construed as a reference to the coming into force of that provision.
2
Substitution of 2. Throughout the Foreign Contribution (Regulation) Act, 2010 (hereinafter 42 of 2010.
certain
referred to as the principal Act), for the words and figures “Code of Criminal
expressions with
certain other Procedure, 1973”, the words and figures “Bharatiya Nagarik Suraksha Sanhita, 2023” 2 of 1974.
expressions. shall be substituted. 46 of 2023.
Amendment of 3.In section 2 of the principal Act, in sub-section (1),— 5
section 2.
(a) clause (a) shall be re-numbered as clause (aa) thereof and before
clause (aa) as so re-numbered, the following clause shall be inserted, namely:—
‘(a) “Administrator” means such officer or authority as may be
notified by the Central Government for the purposes of this Act;’;
(b)clause (f) shall be omitted; 10
(c)after clause (f) as so omitted, the following clause shall be inserted,
namely:—
‘(fa) “Designated authority” means such officer or authority as
may be notified by the Central Government for the purposes of this
Act;’; 15
(d) in clause (g), in sub-clause (i), for the words and figures
“section 591 of the Companies Act, 1956”, the words and figures 1 of 1956.
“section 379 of the Companies Act, 2013” shall be substituted; 18 of 2013.
(e) in clause (j), in sub-clause (vi), for the words and figures
“Companies Act, 1956”, the words and figures “Companies Act, 2013” shall 20 1 of 1956.
be substituted; 18 of 2013.
(f)after clause (j), the following clause shall be inserted, namely:—
‘(ja) “key functionary”, in relation to a person other than an
individual, includes—
(i)the Director of a company; 25
(ii)a partner in a firm;
(iii)a trustee of a trust;
(iv)the Karta of a Hindu undivided family;
(v) an office bearer, member of the governing body,
managing committee or other controlling authority of a society,
30
trust, trade union or association of individuals; and
(vi) any other officer or person, by whatever name called,
who has control over, or responsibility for the management or
affairs of such person;’;
(g) in clause (m), in sub-clause (iv), for the words and figures 35
“section 25 of the Companies Act, 1956”, the words and figures “section 8 of 1 of 1956.
the Companies Act, 2013” shall be substituted; 18 of 2013.
(h)for clause (n), the following clause shall be substituted, namely:—
‘(n) “political party” means an association or body of individual
citizens of India— 40
(i) to be registered with the Election Commission as a
political party under section 29A of the Representation of the
People Act, 1951; or 43 of 1951.
(ii) which has set up candidates for election to any Legislature,
but is not so registered or deemed to be registered under the Election 45
Symbols (Reservation and Allotment) Order, 1968;’;
3
(i) in clause (q), for the words and figures “Press and Registration of
25 of 1867. Books Act, 1867”, the words and figures “Press and Registration of
51 of 2023. Periodicals Act, 2023” shall be substituted;
(j) in clause (r), for the words, brackets and figures “clause (41) of
1 of 1956. 5 section 2 of the Companies Act, 1956”, the words, brackets and figures
18 of 2013. “clause (77) of section 2 of the Companies Act, 2013” shall be substituted;
1 of 1956. (k) in clause (t), for the words and figures “Companies Act, 1956”, the
18 of 2013. words and figures “Companies Act, 2013” shall be substituted.
4.In section 3 of the principal Act, in sub-section (1),— Amendment of
section 3.
10 (a) in clause (g), for the words “association or company”, the word
“person” shall be substituted;
(b)in clause (h), for the words “the association or company”, the words
“an association or company engaged in the activities” shall be substituted;
(c) in Explanation 1, for the words and figures “section 21 of the
45 of 1860. 15 Indian Penal Code”, the words, brackets and figures “clause (28) of section 2
45 of 2023. of the Bharatiya Nyaya Sanhita, 2023” shall be substituted.
5.In section 12 of the principal Act,— Amendment of
section 12.
(a) in sub-section (4), in clause (e), for the words “directors or office
bearers”, the words “key functionaries” shall be substituted;
20 (b) for sub-section (6), the following sub-sections shall be substituted,
namely:—
“(6) The certificate granted under sub-section (3) shall be valid
for a period of five years.
(7) The prior permission given under sub-section (3) shall be
25 valid for a specific purpose or specific amount of foreign contribution
proposed to be received and such foreign contribution shall be received
and utilised within such period as may be prescribed.”.
6.In section 12A of the principal Act, the words “office bearers or Directors Amendment of
or other” shall be omitted. section 12A.
30 7. In section 13 of the principal Act, in sub-section (2), after clause (b), the Amendment of
following clause shall be inserted, namely:–– section 13.
“(c) not alienate, encumber or otherwise deal with any asset created out
of the foreign contribution, except with the prior approval of the Central
Government.”.
35 8.In section 14A of the principal Act, the words, brackets and figures “, and Amendment of
the management of foreign contribution and asset, if any, created out of such section 14A.
contribution has been vested in the authority as provided in sub-section (1) of
section 15” shall be omitted.
9. After section 14A of the principal Act, the following section shall be Insertion of new
inserted, namely:— section 14B.
40
“14B. (1) The certificate shall be deemed to have ceased on the expiry Cessation of
of its period of validity if— certificate.
(a) the application for renewal has not been made under
sub-section (2) of section 16;
45 (b)the application for renewal has been made, but refused by the
Central Government under the second proviso to sub-section (3) of
section 16; or
(c)the certificate is not renewed before its expiry.
4
(2) No person whose certificate has ceased to exist shall either receive
or utilise the foreign contribution unless the certificate is renewed.”.
Omission of 10. Section 15 of the principal Act shall be omitted.
section 15.
Insertion of new
11. After Chapter III of the principal Act, the following Chapter shall be
Chapter IIIA. inserted, namely:–– 5
“CHAPTER IIIA
VESTING OF FOREIGN CONTRIBUTION AND ASSETS IN DESIGNATED
AUTHORITY
Vesting of 16A. (1) The foreign contribution and the assets created out of foreign
foreign contribution of any person— 10
contribution and
assets created (a) whose certificate has been cancelled under section 14; or
out of foreign
contribution in (b) who has surrendered the certificate under section 14A; or
certain cases.
(c) whose certificate has ceased under section 14B or any rules
made under this Act,
shall, from the date of such cancellation, surrender or cessation, vest 15
provisionally in the Designated authority in such manner as may be
prescribed.
(2) An asset shall vest wholly in the Designated authority whether
created or acquired partly from foreign contribution and partly from other
sources: 20
Provided that the person referred to in sub-section (1) may make an
application to the Designated authority for return of any distinct or ascertainable
portion of the asset created or acquired from other sources and the Designated
authority, on being satisfied, shall by an order, return such portion of the asset to
the applicant in such manner as may be prescribed. 25
(3) Upon vesting of the assets in it under sub-section (1), the
Designated authority may either directly or through an Administrator, take
possession of the assets and shall—
(a) be responsible for the supervision, management,
safeguarding, preserving or maintaining the assets so vested in it; 30
(b) if considered necessary or expedient so to do in the public
interest, undertake the management of activities of the person whose
assets are provisionally vested in it under sub-section (1), in such
manner and for such period as may be prescribed and the Designated
authority may utilise the foreign contribution for managing such assets 35
and activities.
(4) Where, in respect of any person referred to in sub-section (1),—
(a) a fresh certificate is granted under section 12;
(b) the certificate is renewed under section 16; or
(c) the certificate is restored by revision under section 32, 40
within such period as may be prescribed, then the Designated authority shall
return the unutilised foreign contribution and such of the assets vested
provisionally in it, subject to such conditions and in such manner as may be
prescribed.
(5) If the person referred to in sub-section (1) fails to obtain a fresh 45
certificate or get its certificate renewed or restored within the period referred
to in sub-section (4), the foreign contribution and the assets created out of
foreign contribution shall thereupon stand permanently vested in the
Designated authority.
5
(6) The Designated authority shall apply the foreign contribution and
the assets permanently vested in it for public purposes and may, by order––
(a) transfer such assets to any Ministry, Department, authority or
agency of the Central Government or of a State Government or any
5 local authority, in such manner as may be prescribed; or
(b) dispose of such assets through sale or any other appropriate
process, in such manner as may be prescribed and credit the sale
proceeds together with any unutilised foreign contribution to the
Consolidated Fund of India:
10 Provided that no person referred to in sub-section (1) or any of its key
functionaries at the time of cancellation, surrender or cessation or any person
acting on behalf or for the benefit of such person or any of its key
functionaries shall directly or indirectly acquire or derive any interest in the
assets so dealt with.
15 (7) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (6), the
Designated authority shall, where any asset permanently vested in it or
portion thereof is a place of worship, entrust the management or operation of
such asset or portion thereof to such person, in such manner and on such
terms and conditions as may be prescribed and ensure that the religious
20 character of such place of worship is maintained.
16B. The provisions of this Act, as amended by the Foreign Treatment of
Contribution (Regulation) Amendment Act, 2026, shall apply to all foreign
foreign
contributions
contributions and assets created out of foreign contributions vested under and assets
section 15 as omitted by the said Act, or any rules made under this Act, as it already vested.
25 stood immediately before the commencement of the said Amendment Act,
and all such foreign contributions and assets shall, from the date of
commencement of the Foreign Contribution (Regulation) Amendment
Act, 2026, be deemed to be provisionally vested in the Designated authority
under sub-section (1) of section 16A.
30 16C. Notwithstanding anything contained in any other law for the time Vesting of assets
being in force, where any person who was permitted to accept foreign where persons
cease to exist.
contribution under this Act ceases to exist or is rendered inoperative or
defunct,—
(a) the last key functionaries of such person shall inform the
35 Central Government of such cessation or status of being inoperative or
defunct, in such form and manner and within such period as may be
prescribed;
(b) the foreign contribution received by such person and the
assets created out of foreign contribution shall stand permanently
40 vested in the Designated authority under sub-section (5) of
section 16A.
16D. (1) Where the Designated authority sells any immovable property Certificate of
sale or certificate
vested in it under this Act, it shall, upon receipt of the sale proceeds, issue a
of transfer of
certificate of sale in such form as may be prescribed, in favour of the vested
45 transferee and such certificate shall, notwithstanding that the original title immovable
deeds of the property have not been delivered to the transferee, be conclusive property.
proof of the transferee’s ownership of the property:
Provided that where such property is transferred by the Designated
authority otherwise than by way of sale, the Designated authority shall issue
50 a certificate of transfer in such form as may be prescribed and such
certificate shall have the same legal effect as a certificate of sale.
6
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in any other law for the time
being in force, the certificate of sale issued under sub-section (1) shall be a
valid instrument for the registration of the property in favour of the
transferee and such registration shall not be refused on the ground of absence
of original title deeds. 5
(3) Any property vested in the Designated authority under this Act
shall not be transferred, whether by order of attachment, seizure or sale in
execution of a decree of a Civil Court or orders of any tribunal or other
authority, except in accordance with the provisions of this Act.
Duties and 16E. (1) Without prejudice to the provisions of section 16A, the 10
responsibilities Designated authority shall be responsible for—
of Designated
authority. (a) maintaining proper records, registers, inventories and
accounts of the foreign contributions and assets vested in it;
(b) reporting to the Central Government any violation of the
provisions of this Act or any fraudulent activity that comes to its notice 15
during the discharge of its duties;
(c) submitting such periodic reports to the Central Government as
may be prescribed; and
(d) discharging such other incidental or ancillary functions as
may be assigned to it by the Central Government. 20
(2) The Designated authority shall act in accordance with such
directions or orders, whether general or special, as may be issued to it by the
Central Government from time to time.
Duties and
16F. Every person whose foreign contribution or assets are vested in
responsibilities the Designated authority and all key functionaries of such person, shall–– 25
of persons
whose foreign (a) afford to the Designated authority or to any person authorised
contributions by it, full and unhindered access to its books of account, records
and assets are
(including electronic records), premises and properties and allow
vested in
Designated
inspection, inventory and valuation thereof;
a uthority.
(b) produce or deliver all books, accounts, documents, securities, 30
keys and movable assets and hand over possession or control of bank
accounts, lockers and safe deposits, as may be required by the
Designated authority;
(c) not alienate, encumber, part with possession of, or conceal,
remove or otherwise deal with any foreign contribution or asset created 35
out of such contribution, except with the prior approval of the
Designated authority;
(d) keep such foreign contribution and assets intact and in the same
condition, and shall carry on its activities under the supervision of, and
subject to such terms and conditions as may be specified by the 40
Designated authority;
(e) furnish correct and complete information, returns and
declarations and cause an authorised representative to appear when
called for; and
(f) provide such assistance and comply with such further directions as 45
may be issued by the Designated authority or the Central Government, as
may be required for the purposes of carrying out the provisions of this Act.
Powers of 16G. The Designated authority and the Administrator, for the purposes
Designated
of discharging their functions under this Act, shall—
authority and
Administrator.
7
(a) have all the powers of a Civil Court under the Code of Civil
Procedure, 1908, while trying a suit, in respect of summoning and
5 of 1908.
enforcing the attendance of any person, examining them on oath,
requiring the discovery and production of documents, receiving
5 evidence on affidavits, issuing commissions and such other matters as
may be prescribed;
(b) be deemed to be a public servant within the meaning of
45 of 2023. clause (28) of section 2 of the Bharatiya Nyaya Sanhita, 2023.
16H. All officers of the Central Government, State Governments, Officers of
Government and
10 Union territory Administrations, local authorities, public financial
other authorities
institutions, banks and such other authorities or agencies as may
t o a s s i s t
be specified by the Central Government shall extend such assistance D e s i g n ated
to the Designated authority as may be required for the discharge a u t h o r i ty.
of its duties.
15 16-I. The Designated authority shall not delegate any of its powers or Delegation of
functions conferred on or assigned to it under this Act or the rules made
powers by
Designated
thereunder, except to such extent, in such manner and subject to such
authority.
conditions as may be prescribed.
16J. The Designated authority may revise any of its orders passed Power of
20 under this Chapter, either on its own motion or on an application made to it Designated
authority to
by the person referred to in section 16A or the last key functionaries referred
revise its order.
to in section 16C, within ninety days from the date of such order, and pass an
order in relation thereto, as it thinks fit.
16K. Any person aggrieved by an order of the Designated authority Appeal against
25 passed under this Chapter may prefer an appeal, within ninety days— order of
Designated
(a) to the Court of the District Judge within the local limits of
authority.
whose jurisdiction the vesting, management or disposal was made;
(b) subject to such pecuniary or other limits as may be prescribed,
to such judicial officer, not below the rank of a Civil Judge of Senior
30 Division, as the Central Government may, by notification, specify in
this behalf.
16L. Notwithstanding anything contained in this Chapter, the Central Power to grant
exemption from
Government may, if it is necessary or expedient so to do in the public
provisions of
interest, exempt such person or class of persons, in such manner and to such
this Chapter.
35 extent and subject to such conditions, as may be prescribed, from the
provisions of this Chapter.”.
12. In Chapter IV of the principal Act, in the Chapter heading, for the words Amendment in
heading of
“AUDIT AND DISPOSAL OF ASSETS”, the word “AUDIT” shall be
Chapter IV.
substituted.
40 13. Section 22 of the principal Act shall be omitted. Omission of
section 22.
14. In section 26 of the principal Act, in sub-section (5), for the words and Amendment of
section 26.
figures “Indian Evidence Act, 1872”, the words and figures “Bharatiya Sakshya
1 of 1872.
47 of 2023. Adhiniyam, 2023” shall be substituted.
15. In section 27 of the principal Act, in the marginal heading, for the words Amendment of
45 and figures “Act 2 of 1974”, the words and figures “Act 46 of 2023” shall be section 27.
substituted.
16. For section 35 of the principal Act, the following section shall be Substitution of
substituted, namely:— new section for
section 35.
8
Punishment for “35. Whoever accepts, utilises or assists any person, political party or
contravention of
organisation in accepting or utilising, any foreign contribution or any currency or
any provision of
security from a foreign source, in contravention of any provision of this Act or
Act.
any rule or order made thereunder, shall be punished with imprisonment for a
term which may extend to one year, or with fine, or with both.”. 5
Substitution of 17. For section 39 of the principal Act, the following section shall be
new section for substituted, namely:—
section 39.
Offences by “39. (1) Where any offence under this Act or any rule or order made
persons other thereunder has been committed by a person other than an individual, every
than individual.
key functionary of such person who, at the time the offence was committed, 10
was in charge of, and was responsible to, the person for the conduct of the
business of the person, as well as the person, shall be deemed to be guilty of
the offence and shall be liable to be proceeded against and punished
accordingly:
Provided that nothing contained in this sub-section shall render such 15
key functionary liable to any punishment if he proves that the offence was
committed without his knowledge or that he had exercised all due diligence
to prevent the commission of such offence.
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (1), where an
offence under this Act or any rule or order made thereunder has been 20
committed by a person other than an individual and it is proved that the
offence has been committed with the consent or connivance of, or is
attributable to any neglect on the part of any key functionary of such person,
such key functionary shall also be deemed to be guilty of that offence and
shall be liable to be proceeded against and punished accordingly.”. 25
Amendment of 18. Section 43 of the principal Act shall be numbered as sub-section (1)
section 43. thereof and after sub-section (1) as so numbered, the following sub-section shall
be inserted, namely:—
“(2) No investigation shall be initiated for any offence punishable
under this Act except with the prior approval of the Central Government.”. 30
Amendment of 19.In section 48 of the principal Act, in sub-section (2),—
section 48.
(a)after clause (l), the following clause shall be inserted, namely:—
“(la) the period for receipt and utilisation of the foreign
contribution under sub-section (7) of section 12;”;
(b)clauses (n) and (o) shall be omitted;
35
(c)after clause (q), the following clauses shall be inserted, namely:––
“(qa) the manner of provisionally vesting in the Designated
authority of the foreign contribution and the assets created out of
foreign contribution of any person under sub-section (1) of
40
section 16A;
(qb) the manner of returning the distinct or ascertainable portion
of the asset created or acquired from other sources by the Designated
authority under the proviso to sub-section (2) of section 16A;
(qc) the manner and period of undertaking the management of
activities of the person by the Designated authority or the 45
Administrator under clause (b) of sub-section (3) of section 16A;
(qd) the period for obtaining, renewing or restoring the certificate
of registration and the conditions and manner of returning the
unutilised foreign contribution and assets by the Designated authority
under sub-section (4) of section 16A; 50
9
(qe) the manner of transferring assets to any Ministry,
Department, authority or agency of the Central Government or the
State Government or any local authority under clause (a) of
sub-section (6) of section 16A;
5 (qf) the manner of disposal of assets through sale or any other
appropriate process under clause (b) of sub-section (6) of section 16A;
(qg) the manner and terms and conditions of entrusting the
management or operation of assets or portion thereof to an eligible
person under sub-section (7) of section 16A;
10 (qh) the form, manner and period of furnishing information by
the last key functionaries under clause (a) of section 16C;
(qi) the form of issuing a certificate of sale or certificate of
transfer by the Designated authority under sub-section (1) of
section 16D;
(qj) the submission of periodic reports by the Designated
15
authority under clause (c) of sub-section (1) of section 16E;
(qk) such other matters under clause (a) of section 16G;
(ql) the extent, manner and conditions of delegation of powers or
functions by the Designated authority under section 16-I;
(qm) the pecuniary or other limits of preferring an appeal by a
20
person aggrieved by an order of Designated authority, to such officer
under clause (b) of section 16K;
(qn) the manner, extent and conditions subject to which any
person or class of persons may be granted exemption from the
25 provisions of Chapter IIIA under section 16L;”;
(d)clause (v) shall be omitted.
20. In section 53 of the principal Act, after sub-section (1), the following Amendment of
sub-section shall be inserted, namely:— section 53.
“(1A) If any difficulty arises in giving effect to the provisions of the
30 Foreign Contribution (Regulation) Amendment Act, 2026, the Central
Government may, by order published in the Official Gazette, make
such provisions, not inconsistent with the provisions of this Act, as appear to
it to be necessary or expedient, for the purpose of removing the difficulty:
Provided that no such order shall be made after the expiry of a period
35 of two years from the date of commencement of this Act.”.
STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
The Foreign Contribution (Regulation) Act, 2010 (the Act) regulates the
acceptance and utilisation of foreign contribution and foreign hospitality to ensure
that such inflows do not adversely affect national interest, public order or national
security. The Act came into force on 1st May, 2011 and has been amended in the
years 2016, 2018 and 2020. At present, approximately 16,000 associations are
registered under the Act and receive around ₹ 22,000 crore annually.
2. Over the period, certain operational and legal gaps have been identified,
particularly in relation to the management of foreign contribution and assets created
therefrom in cases where registration is cancelled, surrendered or otherwise ceases.
Section 15 of the Act provides for vesting of assets, but the absence of a
comprehensive framework for supervision, management and disposal of such assets
has led to administrative uncertainty and scope for misuse. Further, multiplicity of
investigations, inconsistency in penalties, absence of timelines for utilisation, lack
of express provision for cessation of registration, and ambiguity regarding treatment
of assets during suspension have resulted in implementation challenges.
3. It is therefore proposed to amend the Act to introduce a comprehensive
statutory framework for vesting, supervision, management and disposal of foreign
contribution and assets through a Designated authority, including provisional and
permanent vesting; to provide timelines for receipt and utilisation under prior
permission; to provide for cessation of certificate; to regulate handling of assets
during suspension; to rationalise penalties; and to require prior approval of the
Central Government for initiation of investigation.
4. The Foreign Contribution (Regulation) Amendment Bill, 2026, inter alia,
seeks to provide for—
(a) amendment of section 12 to provide timelines for receipt and
utilisation under prior permission;
(b) amendment of section 13 to regulate dealing with assets during
suspension of registration;
(c)insertion of a new section 14B to provide for cessation of certificate
upon expiry, non-renewal or refusal of renewal;
(d)omission of section 15 and insertion of a new Chapter IIIA to provide
a comprehensive framework for vesting, supervision, management and
disposal of foreign contribution and assets, in a Designated authority,
including provisional and permanent vesting;
(e)substitution of section 35 to rationalise penalties;
(f) amendment of section 43 to require prior approval of the Central
Government for initiation of investigation; and
(g)making other consequential amendments.
5.The Bill seeks to achieve the above objectives.
NEW DELHI; AMIT SHAH.
The 19th March, 2026.
10
FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM
The provisions of the proposed legislation do not involve any expenditure,
either recurring or non-recurring, from and out of the Consolidated Fund of India.
11
MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION
Clause 19 of the Bill seeks to amend sub-section (2) of section 48 of the
Foreign Contribution (Regulation) Act, 2010 (42 of 2010) (the Act) relating to the
power of the Central Government to make rules. The proposed amendments to
sub-section (2) of the said section seek to empower the Central Government to make
rules in respect of the following matters, namely:––(a) the period for receipt and
utilisation of the foreign contribution under sub-section (7) of section 12; (b) the
manner of provisionally vesting in the Designated authority of the foreign
contribution and the assets created out of foreign contribution of any person under
sub-section (1) of section 16A; (c) the manner of returning the distinct or
ascertainable portion of the asset created or acquired from other sources by the
Designated authority under the proviso to sub-section (2) of section 16A; (d) the
manner and period of undertaking the management of activities of the person by the
Designated authority or the Administrator under clause (b) of sub-section (3) of
section 16A; (e) the period for obtaining, renewing or restoring the certificate of
registration and the conditions and manner of returning the unutilised foreign
contribution and assets by the Designated authority under sub-section (4) of
section 16A; (f) the manner of transferring assets to any Ministry, Department,
authority or agency of the Central Government or the State Government or any local
authority under clause (a) of sub-section (6) of section 16A; (g) the manner of
disposal of assets through sale or any other appropriate process under clause (b) of
sub-section (6) of section 16A; (h) the manner and terms and conditions of
entrusting the management or operation of portion of assets to an eligible person
under sub-section (7) of section 16A; (i) the form, manner and period of furnishing
information by the last key functionaries under clause (a) of section 16C; (j) the
form of issuing a certificate of sale or certificate of transfer by the Designated
authority under sub-section (1) of section 16D; (k) the submission of periodic reports
by the Designated authority under clause (c) of sub-section (1) of section 16E;
(l) such other matters under clause (a) of section 16G; (m) the extent, manner and
conditions of delegation of powers or functions by the Designated authority under
section 16-I; (n) the pecuniary or other limits of preferring an appeal by a person
aggrieved by an order of Designated authority, to such officer under clause (b) of
section 16K; (o) the manner, extent and conditions subject to which any person or
class of persons may be granted exemption from the provisions of Chapter IIIA
under section 16L.
2.The matters in respect of which rules may be made are matters of procedure
and administrative detail and it is not practicable to provide for them in the Bill
itself. The delegation of legislative power is, therefore, of a normal character.
12
ANNEXURE
EXTRACTS FROM THE FOREIGN CONTRIBUTION (REGULATION) ACT, 2010
(42 OF 2010)
* * * * *
2. (1) In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,— Definitions.
* * * * *
(f) “company” shall have the meaning assigned to it under clause (17) of
43 of 1961. section 2 of the Income-tax Act, 1961;
(g) “foreign company” means any company or association or body of
individuals incorporated outside India and includes—
(i) a foreign company within the meaning of section 591 of the
1 of 1956. Companies Act, 1956;
* * * * *
(j) “foreign source” includes,—
* * * * *
1 of 1956. (vi) a company within the meaning of the Companies Act, 1956,
and more than one-half of the nominal value of its share capital is held,
either singly or in the aggregate, by one or more of the following,
namely:—
(A) the Government of a foreign country or territory;
(B) the citizens of a foreign country or territory;
(C) corporations incorporated in a foreign country or
territory;
(D) trusts, societies or other associations of individuals
(whether incorporated or not), formed or registered in a foreign
country or territory;
(E) foreign company;
Provided that where the nominal value of share capital is within the limits
specified for foreign investment under the Foreign Exchange Management
42 of 1999. Act, 1999, or the rules or regulations made thereunder, then, notwithstanding the
nominal value of share capital of a company being more than one-half of such value
at the time of making the contribution, such company shall not be a foreign source;
* * * * *
(m) “person” includes—
(i) an individual;
(ii) a Hindu undivided family;
(iii) an association;
13
14
(iv) a company registered under section 25 of the Companies
1 of 1956.
Act, 1956;
(n) “political party” means—
(i) an association or body of individual citizens of India—
(A) to be registered with the Election Commission of India
as a political party under section 29A of the Representation of the
People Act, 1951; or 43 of 1951.
(B) which has set up candidates for election to any
Legislature, but is not so registered or deemed to be registered
under the Election Symbols (Reservation and Allotment) Order,
1968;
(ii) a political party mentioned in column 2 of Table 1 and Table 2
to the notification of the Election Commission of India No. 56/J&K/02,
dated the 8th August, 2002, as in force for the time being;
* * * * *
(q) “registered newspaper” means a newspaper registered under the
Press and Registration of Books Act, 1867; 25 of 1867.
(r) “relative” has the meaning assigned to it in clause (41) of section 2
of the Companies Act, 1956; 1 of 1956.
* * * * *
(t) “subsidiary” and “associate” shall have the meanings, respectively
assigned to them in the Companies Act, 1956; 1 of 1956.
* * * * *
CHAPTER II
REGULATION OF FOREIGN CONTRIBUTION AND FOREIGN HOSPITALITY
Prohibition to 3. (1) No foreign contribution shall be accepted by any—
accept foreign
contribution. * * * * *
(g) association or company engaged in the production or broadcast of
audio news or audio visual news or current affairs programmes through any
electronic mode, or any other electronic form as defined in clause (r) of
sub-section (1) of section 2 of the Information Technology Act, 2000 2 1 o f 2 0 0 0 .
or any other mode of mass communication;
(h) correspondent or columnist, cartoonist, editor, owner of the
association or company referred to in clause (g).
Explanation 1.—For the purpose of clause (c), “public servant” means a public
servant as defined in section 21 of the Indian Penal Code. 45 of 1860.
* * * * *
Grant of 12. (1) * * * * *
certificate of
registration. (4) The following shall be the conditions for the purposes of sub-section (3),
namely:—
* * * * *
(e) in case the person being other than an individual, any of its directors
or office bearers has neither been convicted under any law for the time being
in force nor any prosecution for any offence is pending against him;
15
* * * * *
(6) The certificate granted under sub-section (3) shall be valid for a period of
five years and the prior permission shall be valid for the specific purpose or specific
amount of foreign contribution proposed to be received, as the case may be.
12A. Notwithstanding anything contained in this Act, the Central Government Power of Central
may require that any person who seeks prior permission or prior approval under section Government to
require Aadhaar
11, or makes an application for grant of certificate under section 12, or, as the case may
number, etc., as
be, for renewal of certificate under section 16, shall provide as identification document, identification
the Aadhaar number of all its office bearers or Directors or other key functionaries, by document.
whatever name called, issued under the Aadhaar (Targeted Delivery of Financial and
18 of 2016. Other Subsidies, Benefits and Services) Act, 2016, or a copy of the Passport or Overseas
Citizen of India Card, in case of a foreigner.
13. (1) * * * * * Suspension of
certificate.
(2) Every person whose certificate has been suspended shall—
* * * * *
(b) utilise, in the prescribed manner, the foreign contribution in his
custody with the prior approval of the Central Government.
* * * * *
14A. On a request being made in this behalf, the Central Government may Surrender of
permit any person to surrender the certificate granted under this Act, if, after making certificate.
such inquiry as it deems fit, it is satisfied that such person has not contravened any
of the provisions of this Act, and the management of foreign contribution and asset,
if any, created out of such contribution has been vested in the authority as provided
in sub-section (1) of section 15.
* * * * *
15. (1) The foreign contribution and assets created out of the foreign Management of
contribution in the custody of every person whose certificate has been cancelled foreign
contribution of
under section 14 2 or surrendered under section 14A shall vest in such authority as
person whose
may be prescribed. certificate has
been cancelled 2
(2) The authority referred to in sub-section (1) may, if it considers necessary
or surrendered.
and in public interest, manage the activities of the person referred to in that
sub-section for such period and in such manner, as the Central Government may
direct and such authority may utilise the foreign contribution or dispose of the assets
created out of it in case adequate funds are not available for running such activity.
(3) The authority referred to in sub-section (1) shall return the foreign contribution
and the assets vested upon it under that sub-section to the person referred to in the said
sub-section if such person is subsequently registered under this Act.
* * * * *
CHAPTER IV
ACCOUNTS, INTIMATION, AUDIT AND DISPOSAL OF ASSETS, ETC.
* * * * *
22. Where any person who was permitted to accept foreign contribution under Disposal of
this Act, ceases to exist or has become defunct, all the assets of such person shall be assets created
out of foreign
disposed of in accordance with the provisions contained in any law for the time
contribution.
being in force under which the person was registered or incorporated, and in the
absence of any such law, the Central Government may, having regard to the nature
of assets created out of foreign contribution received under this Act, by notification,
specify that all such assets shall be disposed off by such authority, as it may specify,
in such manner and procedure as may be prescribed.
* * * * *
16
Disposal of 26. (1) * * * * *
seized article or
currency or (5) Notwithstanding anything contained in the Indian Evidence Act, 1872 1 o f 1872
security.
or the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973, every court trying an offence under this 2 of 1974
Act, shall treat the inventory, as certified by the Magistrate, as primary evidence in
respect of such offence.
* * * * *
Seizure to be 27. The provisions of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973 shall apply in so
made in far as they are not inconsistent with the provisions of this Act to all seizures made
accordance with
under this Act.
Act 2 of 1974.
* * * * *
Punishment for 35. Whoever accepts, or assists any person, political party or organisation in
contravention of
accepting, any foreign contribution or any currency or security from a foreign
any provision of
the Act. source, in contravention of any provision of this Act or any rule or order made
thereunder, shall be punished with imprisonment for a term which may extend to
five years, or with fine, or with both.
* * * * *
Offences by 39. (1) Where an offence under this Act or any rule or order made thereunder
companies. has been committed by a company, every person who, at the time the offence was
committed, was in charge of, and was responsible to, the company for the conduct
of the business of the company, as well as the company, shall be deemed to be guilty
of the offence and shall be liable to be proceeded against and punished accordingly:
Provided that nothing contained in this sub-section shall render such person
liable to any punishment if he proves that the offence was committed without his
knowledge or that he had exercised all due diligence to prevent the commission of
such offence.
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (1), where an offence
under this Act or any rule or order made thereunder has been committed by a
company and it is proved that the offence has been committed with the consent or
connivance of, or is attributable to any neglect on the part of, any director, manager,
secretary or other officer of the company, such director, manager, secretary or other
officer shall also be deemed to be guilty of that offence and shall be liable to be
proceeded against and punished accordingly.
Explanation.—For the purposes of this section,—
(a) “company” means any body corporate and includes a firm, society,
trade union or other association of individuals; and
(b) “director”, in relation to a firm, society, trade union or other
association of individuals, means a partner in the firm or a member of the
governing body of such society, trade union or other association of
individuals.
* * * * *
Power to make 48. (1) * * * * *
rules.
(2) In particular, and without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing
power, such rules may provide for all or any of the following matters, namely:—
* * * * *
(n) the authority with whom the foreign contribution to be vested under
sub-section (1) of section 15;
17
(o) the period within which and the manner in which the foreign
contribution shall be managed under sub-section (2) of section 15;
* * * * *
(v) the manner and procedure to be followed in disposing of the assets
under section 22;
* * * * *
LOK SABHA
————
A
BILL
further to amend the Foreign Contribution (Regulation) Act, 2010.
————
(Shri Amit Shah, Minister of Home Affairs and Cooperation)
