AS INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA
Bill No. 113 of 2025
THE GOVERNMENT OF UNION TERRITORIES (AMENDMENT)
BILL, 2025
A
BILL
further to amend the Government of Union Territories Act, 1963.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Seventy-sixth Year of the Republic of India
as follows:––
1. (1) This Act may be called the Government of Union Territories Short title and
commencement.
(Amendment) Act, 2025.
5 (2) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by
notification in the Official Gazette, appoint.
2
Amendment of 2. In section 45 of the Government of Union Territories Act, 1963, after 20 of 1963.
section 45.
sub-section (5), the following sub-section shall be inserted, namely:––
“(5A) A Minister, who for any period of thirty consecutive days during
holding the office as such, is arrested and detained in custody, on allegation of
committing an offence under any law for the time being in force, which is 5
punishable with imprisonment for a term which may extend to five years or
more, shall be removed from his office, by the President on the advice of the
Chief Minister to be tendered by the thirty-first day, after being taken in such
custody:
Provided that if the advice of the Chief Minister, for the removal of such 10
Minister is not tendered to the President by the thirty-first day, he shall cease
to be a Minister, with effect from the day falling thereafter:
Provided further that in case of the Chief Minister, who for any period
of thirty consecutive days during holding the office as such, is arrested and
detained in custody, on allegation of committing an offence under any law for 15
the time being in force, which is punishable with imprisonment for a term
which may extend to five years or more, shall tender his resignation by the
thirty-first day after such arrest and detention, and if he does not tender his
resignation, he shall cease to be the Chief Minister, with effect from the day
falling thereafter: 20
Provided also that nothing in this sub-section shall prevent such
Chief Minister or Minister from being subsequently appointed as the
Chief Minister or a Minister, by the President, on his release from custody, as
per sub-section (1).”.
STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
The elected representatives represent hopes and aspirations of the people of
India. It is expected that they rise above political interests and act only in the
public interest and for the welfare of people.
2. It is expected that the character and conduct of Ministers holding the
office should be beyond any ray of suspicion.
3. A Minister, who is facing allegation of serious criminal offences, arrested
and detained in custody, may thwart or hinder the canons of constitutional
morality and principles of good governance and eventually diminish the
constitutional trust reposed by people in him.
4. There is, however, no provision under the Government of Union
Territories Act, 1963 (20 of 1963) for removal of the Chief Minister or a Minister
who is arrested and detained in custody on account of serious criminal charges.
5. In view of the above, there is a need to amend section 45 of the
Government of Union Territories Act, 1963, for providing legal framework for
removal of the Chief Minister or a Minister in such cases.
6. The Bill seeks to achieve the above objectives.
NEW DELHI; AMIT SHAH.
The 19th August, 2025.
3
LOK SABHA
————
A
BILL
further to amend the Government of Union Territories Act, 1963.
————
(Shri Amit Shah, Minister of Home Affairs and Cooperation)
