AS INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA
Bill No. 112 of 2025
THE JAMMU AND KASHMIR REORGANISATION
(AMENDMENT) BILL, 2025
A
BILL
further to amend the Jammu and Kashmir Reorganisation Act, 2019.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Seventy-sixth Year of the Republic of
India as follows:––
1. (1) This Act may be called the Jammu and Kashmir Reorganisation Short title and
commencement.
(Amendment) Act, 2025.
(2) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by
5
notification in the Official Gazette, appoint.
2. In section 54 of the Jammu and Kashmir Reorganisation Act, 2019, after Amendment of
34 of 2019.
section 54.
sub-section (5), the following sub-section shall be inserted, namely:––
2
“(5A) A Minister, who for any period of thirty consecutive days during
holding the office as such, is arrested and detained in custody, on allegation
of committing an offence under any law for the time being in force, which is
punishable with imprisonment for a term which may extend to five years or
more, shall be removed from his office, by the Lieutenant Governor on the 5
advice of the Chief Minister to be tendered by the thirty-first day, after being
taken in such custody:
Provided that if the advice of the Chief Minister, for the removal of
such Minister is not tendered to the Lieutenant Governor by the
thirty-first day, he shall cease to be a Minister, with effect from the day
10
falling thereafter:
Provided further that in case of the Chief Minister, who for any period
of thirty consecutive days during holding the office as such, is arrested and
detained in custody, on allegation of committing an offence under any law
for the time being in force, which is punishable with imprisonment for a term 15
which may extend to five years or more, shall tender his resignation by the
thirty-first day after such arrest and detention, and if he does not tender his
resignation, he shall cease to be the Chief Minister, with effect from the day
falling thereafter:
Provided also that nothing in this sub-section shall prevent such Chief 20
Minister or Minister from being subsequently appointed as the Chief
Minister or a Minister, by the Lieutenant Governor, on his release from
custody, as per sub-section (1).”.
STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
The elected representatives represent hopes and aspirations of the people of
India. It is expected that they rise above political interests and act only in the
public interest and for the welfare of people.
2. It is expected that the character and conduct of Ministers holding the office
should be beyond any ray of suspicion.
3. A Minister, who is facing allegation of serious criminal offences, arrested
and detained in custody, may thwart or hinder the canons of constitutional morality
and principles of good governance and eventually diminish the constitutional trust
reposed by people in him.
4. However, there is no provision under the Jammu and Kashmir
Reorganisation Act, 2019 (34 of 2019) for removal of the Chief Minister or a
Minister who is arrested and detained in custody on account of serious criminal
charges.
5. In view of the above, there is a need to amend section 54 of the Jammu
and Kashmir Reorganisation Act, 2019, for providing legal framework for removal
of the Chief Minister or a Minister in such cases.
6. The Bill seeks to achieve the above objectives.
NEW DELHI; AMIT SHAH.
The 19th August, 2025.
3
LOK SABHA
————
A
BILL
further to amend the Jammu and Kashmir Reorganisation Act, 2019.
————
(Shri Amit Shah, Minister of Home Affairs and Cooperation)
