AS INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA
Bill No. 140 of 2025
THE MANIPUR GOODS AND SERVICES TAX
(SECOND AMENDMENT) BILL, 2025
A
BILL
further to amend the Manipur Goods and Services Tax Act, 2017.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Seventy-sixth Year of the Republic of India
as follows:—
1. (1) This Act may be called the Manipur Goods and Services Tax (Second Short title and
Amendment) Act, 2025. commencement.
5 (2)Save as otherwise provided in this Act, sections 2 to 5, 7 to 13 and 15 shall
come into force on such date as the State Government may, by notification in the
Official Gazette, appoint.
2
Amendment of 2. In the Manipur Goods and Services Tax Act, 2017 (hereinafter referred to Manipur Act 3
section 2. of 2017.
as the principal Act), in section 2,—
(a) in clause (61), after the word and figure “section 9”, the words,
brackets and figures “of this Act or under sub-section (3) or sub-section (4) of
section 5 of the Integrated Goods and Services Tax Act, 2017” shall be 5 13 of 2017.
inserted and shall be deemed to have been inserted with effect from the
1st day of April, 2025;
(b) in clause (69),—
(i) in sub-clause (c), for the words “management of a municipal or
local fund;”, the words “management of a local fund or municipal fund.” 10
shall be substituted;
(ii) after sub-clause (c), the following Explanation shall be
inserted, namely:—
‘Explanation.—For the purposes of this sub-clause,—
(a) “local fund” means any fund under the control or 15
management of an authority of a local self-government
established for discharging civic functions in relation to a
Panchayat area and vested by law with the powers to levy,
collect and appropriate any tax, duty, toll, cess or fee, by
whatever name called;
20
(b) “municipal fund” means any fund under the control
or management of an authority of a local self-government
established for discharging civic functions in relation to a
Metropolitan area or Municipal area and vested by law with
the powers to levy, collect and appropriate any tax, duty, toll, 25
cess or fee, by whatever name called;’;
(c) after clause (116), the following clause shall be inserted,
namely:—
‘(116A) “unique identification marking” means the unique
identification marking referred to in clause (b) of sub-section (2) of 30
section 148A and includes a digital stamp, digital mark or any other
similar marking, which is unique, secure and non-removable;’.
Amendment of 3. In section 12 of the principal Act,—
section 12.
(a) sub-section (4) shall be omitted;
(b) in sub-section (5), for the words, brackets and figures 3 5
“, sub-section (3) or sub-section (4),” the words, brackets and figure
“or sub-section (3)” shall be substituted.
Amendment of 4. In section 13 of the principal Act,—
section 13.
(a) sub-section (4) shall be omitted;
(b) in sub-section (5), for the words, brackets and figures 4 0
“, sub-section (3) or sub-section (4),” the words, brackets and figure
“or sub-section (3)” shall be substituted.
Amendment of 5. In section 17 of the principal Act, in sub-section (5), in clause (d),—
section 17.
(a) for the words “plant or machinery”, the words “plant and machinery”
shall be substituted and shall be deemed to have been substituted with effect 45
from the 1st day of July, 2017;
(b) the Explanation shall be numbered as Explanation 1 thereof, and
after Explanation 1 as so numbered, the following Explanation shall be
inserted, namely:—
3
‘Explanation 2.—For the purposes of clause (d), it is hereby
clarified that notwithstanding anything to the contrary contained in any
judgment, decree or order of any court, tribunal, or other authority, any
reference to “plant or machinery” shall be construed and shall always be
5 deemed to have been construed as a reference to “plant and machinery”;’.
6. In section 20 of the principal Act, with effect from the 1st day of A m e n d ment of
section 20.
April, 2025,—
(a) in sub-section (1), after the word and figure “section 9”, the words,
brackets and figures “of this Act or under sub-section (3) or sub-section (4) of
13 of 2017. 10 section 5 of the Integrated Goods and Services Tax Act, 2017” shall be
inserted and shall be deemed to have been inserted;
(b) in sub-section (2), after the word and figure “section 9”, the words,
brackets and figures “of this Act or under sub-section (3) or sub-section (4) of
13 of 2017.
section 5 of the Integrated Goods and Services Tax Act, 2017,” shall be
15 inserted and shall be deemed to have been inserted.
7. In section 34 of the principal Act, in sub-section (2), for the proviso, the Amendment of
following proviso shall be substituted, namely:— section 34.
“Provided that no reduction in output tax liability of the supplier shall be
permitted, if the—
(i) input tax credit as is attributable to such a credit note, if availed,
20
has not been reversed by the recipient, where such recipient is a
registered person; or
(ii) incidence of tax on such supply has been passed on to any other
person, in other cases.”.
25 8. In section 38 of the principal Act,— Amendment of
section 38.
(a) in sub-section (1), for the words “an auto-generated statement”, the
words “a statement” shall be substituted;
(b) in sub-section (2),—
(i) for the words “auto-generated statement under”, the words
30 “statement referred in” shall be substituted;
(ii) in clause (a), the word “and” shall be omitted;
(iii) in clause (b), after the words “by the recipient,”, the word
“including” shall be inserted;
(iv) after clause (b), the following clause shall be inserted,
35 namely:—
“(c) such other details, as may be prescribed.”.
9. In section 39 of the principal Act, in sub-section (1), for the words “and Amendment of
within such time”, the words “within such time, and subject to such conditions and section 39.
restrictions” shall be substituted.
40 10. In section 107 of the principal Act, in sub-section (6), for the proviso, the Amendment of
following proviso shall be substituted, namely:— section 107.
“Provided that in case of any order demanding penalty without involving
demand of any tax, no appeal shall be filed against such order unless a sum equal to
ten per cent. of the said penalty has been paid by the appellant.”.
4
Amendment of 11. In section 112 of the principal Act, in sub-section (8), the following
section 112.
proviso shall be inserted, namely:—
“Provided that in case of any order demanding penalty without involving
demand of any tax, no appeal shall be filed against such order unless a sum
equal to ten per cent. of the said penalty, in addition to the amount payable 5
under the proviso to sub-section (6) of section 107 has been paid by the
appellant.”.
Insertion of new 12. After section 122A of the principal Act, the following section shall be
section 122B. inserted, namely:—
Penalty for “122B. Notwithstanding anything contained in this Act, where any 10
failure to comply
person referred to in clause (b) of sub-section (1) of section 148A acts in
with track and
trace contravention of the provisions of the said section, he shall, in addition to any
mechanism. penalty under Chapter XV or the provisions of this Chapter, be liable to pay a
penalty equal to an amount of one lakh rupees or ten per cent. of the tax
payable on such goods, whichever is higher.”. 15
Insertion of new 13. After section 148 of the principal Act, the following section shall be
section 148A. inserted, namely:—
Track and trace “148A. (1) The Government may, on the recommendations of the
mechanism for Council, by notification, specify—
certain goods.
(a) the goods; 20
(b) persons or class of persons who are in possession or deal with
such goods,
to which the provisions of this section shall apply.
(2) The Government may, in respect of the goods referred to in
clause (a) of sub-section (1),— 25
(a) provide a system for enabling affixation of unique
identification marking and for electronic storage and access of
information contained therein, through such persons, as may be
prescribed; and
(b) prescribe the unique identification marking for such goods, 30
including the information to be recorded therein.
(3) The persons referred to in sub-section (1) shall—
(a) affix on the said goods or packages thereof, a unique
identification marking, containing such information and in such manner;
(b) furnish such information and details within such time and 35
maintain such records or documents, in such form and manner;
(c) furnish details of the machinery installed in the place of
business of manufacture of such goods, including the identification,
capacity, duration of operation and such other details or information,
within such time and in such form and manner; 40
(d) pay such amount in relation to the system referred to in
sub-section (2),
as may be prescribed.”.
Amendment of 14. In Schedule III to the principal Act, with effect from the 1st day of
Schedule III. July, 2017,— 45
(i) in paragraph 8, after clause (a), the following clause shall be inserted
and shall be deemed to have been inserted, namely:—
5
“(aa) supply of goods warehoused in a Special Economic Zone or
in a Free Trade Warehousing Zone to any person before clearance for
exports or to the Domestic Tariff Area;”;
(ii) in Explanation 2, after the words “For the purposes of”, the words,
5 brackets and letter “clause (a) of” shall be inserted and shall be deemed to
have been inserted;
(iii) after Explanation 2, the following Explanation shall be inserted and
shall be deemed to have been inserted, namely:—
‘Explanation 3.—For the purposes of clause (aa), the expressions
10 “Special Economic Zone”, “Free Trade Warehousing Zone” and
“Domestic Tariff Area” shall have the same meanings as respectively
28 of 2005. assigned to them in section 2 of the Special Economic Zones Act, 2005.’.
15. No refund shall be made of all such tax which has been collected, but No refund of tax
which would not have been so collected, had section 14 been in force at all material collected.
15 times.
16. (1) The Manipur Goods and Services Tax (Second Amendment) Repeal and
Ord. 2 of 2025. Ordinance, 2025 is hereby repealed. savings.
(2) Notwithstanding such repeal, anything done or any action taken under the
said Ordinance shall be deemed to have been done or taken under the corresponding
20 provisions of this Act.
STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
The Manipur Goods and Services Tax Act, 2017 was enacted pursuant to
enactment of the Central Goods and Services Tax Act, 2017 to make provision for
levy and collection of tax on intra-State supply of goods or services or both by the
State of Manipur and for matters connected therewith or incidental thereto.
2. The provisions of the Central Goods and Services Tax Act, 2017 were
amended through sections 121 to 134 of the Finance Act, 2025 and similar
amendments were required to be carried out in the Manipur Goods and Services Tax
Act, 2017 at the earliest, as per the decision of the 56th GST Council, to avoid
repugnancy with the said Central Act.
3. Since the proclamation issued by the President under article 356 of the
Constitution is in force in the State of Manipur since the 13th February, 2025 and
as Parliament was not in session and circumstances existed which rendered it
necessary to take immediate action to have continuance of the Manipur Goods and
Services Tax Act, 2017 in line with the Central Goods and Services Tax Act, 2017,
the President promulgated the Manipur Goods and Services Tax (Second
Amendment) Ordinance, 2025 on the 7th October, 2025.
4. The Manipur Goods and Services Tax (Second Amendment) Ordinance,
2025 is to be replaced by an Act of Parliament and for the said purpose, it is
proposed to introduce the Manipur Goods and Services Tax (Second Amendment)
Bill, 2025 in Parliament.
5. The Bill seeks to achieve the above objectives.
NEW DELHI; NIRMALA SITHARAMAN.
The 27th November, 2025.
6
FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM
The Bill seeks to amend the Manipur Goods and Services Tax Act, 2017. The
Bill, if enacted, will not involve any expenditure, either recurring or non-recurring
nature from the Consolidated Fund of the State of Manipur.
7
MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION
Clause 8 of the Bill seeks to amend sub-section (2) of section 38 of the
Manipur Goods and Services Tax Act to empower the Government to provide by
rules other details to be made available in the statement.
2. Clause 13 of the Bill seeks to insert a new section 148A in the Manipur
Goods and Services Tax Act, relating to track and trace mechanism for certain
goods. Sub-section (2) of the said section 148A seeks to empower the Government
to provide by rules a system for enabling affixation of unique identification marking
and for electronic storage and access of information and the person through whom
such system may be provided. It further seeks to empower the Government to
provide by rules the unique identification marking for goods including the
information to be recorded therein.
3. Sub-section (3) of the said section 148A seeks to empower the Government
to provide by rules, the information to be contained in, and the manner of affixing
on the goods and packages a unique identification marking under clause (a), the
form and manner and the time for furnishing information and details and
maintaining records or documents under clause (b), the time within which and the
form and manner in which other details shall be furnished under clause (c) and the
amount to be paid under clause (d) of the said sub-section.
4. The matters in respect of which rules or regulations may be made or
notifications or order may be issued in accordance with the provisions of the Bill
are matters of procedure and detail and it is not practicable to provide for them in
the Bill itself. The delegation of legislative power is, therefore, of a normal
character.
8
9
ANNEXURE
EXTRACTS FROM THE MANIPUR GOODS AND SERVICES TAX ACT, 2017
(Manipur Act No. 3 of 2017)
* * * * *
2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,— Definitions.
* * * * *
(61) “Input Service Distributor” means an office of the supplier of goods
or services or both which receives tax invoices towards the receipt of input
services, including invoices in respect of services liable to tax under
sub-section (3) or sub-section (4) of section 9, for or on behalf of distinct
persons referred to in section 25, and liable to distribute the input tax credit in
respect of such invoices in the manner provided in section 20;
* * * * *
(69) “local authority” means—
* * * * *
(c) a Municipal Committee, a Zilla Parishad, a District Board, and
any other authority legally entitled to, or entrusted by the Central
Government or any State Government with the control or management
of a municipal or local fund;
* * * * *
CHAPTER IV
TIME AND VALUE OF SUPPLY
12. (1) * * * * * Time of supply
of goods.
(4) In case of supply of vouchers by a supplier, the time of supply shall be—
(a) the date of issue of voucher, if the supply is identifiable at that point; or
(b) the date of redemption of voucher, in all other cases.
(5) Where it is not possible to determine the time of supply under the
provisions of sub-section (2), sub-section (3) or sub-section (4), the time of supply
shall—
(a) in a case where a periodical return has to be filed, be the date on
which such return is to be filed, or
(b) in any other case, be the date on which the tax is paid.
* * * * *
13. (1) * * * * * Time of supply
of services.
(4) In case of supply of vouchers, by a supplier, the time of supply shall be—
(a) the date of issue of voucher, if the supply is identifiable at that point;
or
(b) the date of redemption of voucher, in all other cases.
(5) Where it is not possible to determine the time of supply of services in the
manner specified in sub-section (2), sub-section (3) or sub-section (4), the time of
supply shall—
(a) in a case where a periodical return has to be filed, be the date on
which such return is to be filed; or
(b) in any other case, be the date on which the tax is paid.
* * * * *
9
10
Apportionment 17. (1) * * * * *
of credit
and blocked
(5) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (1) of section 16 and
credits.
sub-section (1) of section 18, input tax credit shall not be available in respect of the
following, namely:—
* * * * *
(d) goods or services or both received by a taxable person for
construction of an immovable property (other than plant or machinery) on his
own account including when such goods or services or both are used in the
course or furtherance of business.
Explanation:—For the purposes of clauses (c) and (d), the expression
“construction” includes re-construction, renovation, additions or alterations or
repairs, to the extent of capitalization, to the said immovable property;
* * * * *
Manner of 20. (1) Any office of the supplier of goods or services or both which receives
distribution of tax invoices towards the receipt of input services, including invoices in respect of
credit by Input
services liable to tax under sub-section (3) or sub-section (4) of section 9, for or on
Service
Distributor. behalf of distinct persons referred to in section 25, shall be required to be registered
as Input Service Distributor under clause (viii) of section 24 and shall distribute the
input tax credit in respect of such invoices.
(2) The Input Service Distributor shall distribute the credit of State tax or
integrated tax charged on invoices received by him, including the credit of State or
integrated tax in respect of services subject to levy of tax under sub-section (3) or
sub-section (4) of section 9 paid by a distinct person registered in the same State as
the said Input Service Distributor, in such manner, within such time and subject to
such restrictions and conditions as may be prescribed.
* * * * *
34. (1) * * * * *
Credit and debit
notes.
(2) Any registered person who issues a credit note in relation to a supply of
goods or services or both shall declare the details of such credit note in the return
for the month during which such credit note has been issued but not later than
September following the end of the financial year in which such supply was made,
or the date of filing of the relevant annual return, whichever is earlier, and the tax
liability shall be adjusted in such manner as may be prescribed:
Provided that no reduction in output tax liability of the supplier shall be
permitted, if the incidence of tax and interest on such supply has been passed on to
any other person.
* * * * *
38. (1) The details of outward supplies furnished by the registered persons
Communication
of details of under sub-section (1) of section 37 and of such other supplies as may be prescribed,
inward supplies and an auto-generated statement containing the details of input tax credit shall be
and input tax
made available electronically to the recipients of such supplies in such form and
credit.
manner, within such time, and subject to such conditions and restrictions as may be
prescribed.
(2) The auto-generated statement under sub-section (1) shall consist of—
11
(a) details of inward supplies in respect of which credit of input tax may
be available to the recipient; and
(b) details of supplies in respect of which such credit cannot be availed,
whether wholly or partly, by the recipient, on account of the details of the said
supplies being furnished under sub-section (1) of section 37,—
* * * * *
39. (1) Every registered person, other than an Input Service Distributor or a Furnishing of
non-resident taxable person or a person paying tax under the provisions of R e turns.
section 10 or section 51 or section 52 shall, for every calendar month or part thereof,
furnish, in such form, manner and within such time as may be prescribed, a return,
electronically, of inward and outward supplies of goods or services or both, input
tax credit availed, tax payable, tax paid and other particulars as may be prescribed:
Provided that the Government may, on the recommendations of the Council,
notify certain classes of registered persons who shall furnish a return for every quarter
or part thereof, subject to such conditions and safeguards as may be specified therein.
* * * * *
CHAPTER-XVIII
APPEALS AND REVISION
107. (1) * * * * * Appeals to
Appellate
Authority.
(6) No appeal shall be filed under sub-section (1), unless the appellant has
paid—
(a) in full, such part of the amount of tax, interest, fine, fee and penalty
arising from the impugned order, is admitted by him; and
(b) a sum equal to ten per cent. of the remaining amount of tax in dispute
arising from the said order, subject to a maximum of twenty-five crore rupees,
in relation to which the appeal has been filed:
Provided that no appeal shall be filed against an order under sub-section (3)
of section 129, unless a sum equal to twenty-five per cent. of the penalty has been
paid by the appellant.
* * * * *
112. (1) * * * * * Appeals to
Appellate
Tribunal.
(8) No appeal shall be filed under sub-section (1), unless the appellant has
paid—
(a) in full, such part of the amount of tax, interest, fine, fee and penalty
arising from the impugned order, as is admitted by him, and
(b) a sum equal to twenty per cent. of the remaining amount of tax in
dispute, in addition to the amount paid under sub-section (6) of section 107,
arising from the said order, subject to a maximum of fifty crore rupees, in
relation to which the appeal has been filed.
* * * * *
12
SCHEDULE III
[See section 7]
ACTIVITIES OR TRANSACTIONS WHICH SHALL BE TREATED
NEITHER AS A SUPPLY OF GOODS NOR A SUPPLY OF SERVICES
* * * * *
8. (a) Supply of warehoused goods to any person before clearance for home
consumption;
* * * * *
Explanation 1.—For the purposes of paragraph 2, the term “court” includes
District Court, High Court and Supreme Court.
Explanation 2.—For the purposes of paragraph 8, the expression “warehoused
goods” shall have the same meaning as assigned to it in the Customs Act, 1962. 52 of 1962.
LOK SABHA
————
A
BILL
further to amend the Manipur Goods and Services Tax Act, 2017.
————
(Smt. Nirmala Sitharaman, Minister of Finance and Corporate Affairs)
म(cid:872)णपरु माल और सेवा कर (दसू रा सशं ोधन) (cid:874)वधेयक, 2025 का श(cid:622)ु (cid:876)धप(cid:287)
प(cid:231)ृ ठ पंि(cid:200)त के (cid:232)थान पर पढ़(cid:581)
5 35 (cid:871)लए ह(cid:583) ह(cid:583)
9 3 संशोधन सरकार संशोधन करके सरकार
