Monthly Policy Review
February 2024
Highlights of this Issue
17th Lok Sabha concludes with passing of the Interim Union Budget (p. 2)
In this term, Parliament had 274 sittings and passed 221 Bills. Four Bills will lapse and 20 Bills remain pending in
Rajya Sabha.
Supreme Court declares electoral bonds unconstitutional (p. 3)
It directed SBI to submit details of electoral bonds purchased since April 2019 to the Election Commission. The
Commission must make these details public by March 13, 2024.
Interim Budget 2024-25 passed (p. 2)
Total expenditure is estimated at Rs 47.65 lakh crore in 2024-25, an increase of 6.1% over revised estimates for 2023-
24. Fiscal deficit in 2024-25 is estimated at 5.1% of GDP, lower than revised estimates for 2023-24 (5.8% of GDP).
Parliament passes five seven Bills
These include Bills to prohibit usage of unfair means in public examination, extend OBC reservations to local bodies
in Jammu and Kashmir, and modify lists of Scheduled Castes and Tribes for Odisha and Andhra Pradesh.
GDP grew by 8.4% in third quarter of 2023-24 (p. 2)
In the third quarter of 2022-23, GDP had grown by 4.3%. As per the Second Advance Estimate, GDP is estimated to
grow by 7.6% in 2023-24.
Cabinet approves several schemes
These include the scheme to provide for rooftop solar to households, and the scheme to support small fisheries
enterprises. It also approved the amendments to FDI norms for the space sector.
IT Rules amended to require Home Secretary to delete interception records (p. 11)
The 2009 Rules require the security agency to destroy all records pertaining to interception every six months, unless
likely to be required. The amended Rules require the Home Secretary to also destroy such records at their end.
Surrogacy Rules amended to allow intending couple to use donor gametes (p. 12)
The amendment also mandates that at least one gamete should belong to the intending couple. The norm for single
women (widowed/ divorced) to use their own eggs for surrogacy remains unchanged.
Electricity (Rights of Consumers) Rules amended (p. 14)
Owners residing in apartments/societies may choose between a single connection for the premises or individual
connections. Solar rooftop systems upto 10 kw have been exempted from technical feasibility study.
Standing Committees submit reports on various subjects
These include reports on MGNREGA, Smart Cities Mission, national highways, medical education, legal education,
maximising exports, digital payments and online security, and Yamuna River cleaning projects.
Law Commission publishes reports on various subjects (p. 4)
These reports recommend retaining criminal defamation, clarifying several provisions in the Epidemic Diseases Act,
1897, and providing for compulsory registration of NRI marriages.
Draft Rules on Offshore Areas Mineral Trust released for public feedback (p. 18)
The draft Rules provide for setting up the Trust in accordance with the Offshore Areas Mineral (Development and
Regulation) Amendment Act, 2023.
March 1, 2024
PRS Legislative Research ◼ Institute for Policy Research Studies
3rd Floor, Gandharva Mahavidyalaya ◼ 212, Deen Dayal Upadhyaya Marg ◼ New Delhi – 110002
Tel: (011) 23234801, 43434035 ◼ www.prsindia.org
Monthly Policy Review – February 2024 PRS Legislative Research
Parliament Awas Yojana. Also, rooftop solarisation of one
crore houses will be taken up.
Niranjana S Menon (niranjana@prsindia.org)
▪ Private entities will be provided long term loans at
low or nil interest rates to scale up research and
17th Lok Sabha concludes
innovation. The loans will be provided through a
The last session of the 17th Lok Sabha (Budget Session corpus (set up by the government) of one lakh
2024) was held from January 31, 2024 to February 10, crore rupees.
2024 (nine sitting days). The session was scheduled to
Table 1: Interim Union Budget 2024-25 highlights
end on February 9, 2024, but was extended by one day.
(in Rs crore)
During the term of the 17th Lok Sabha, Parliament %
passed 221 Bills (of which 42 were for approving the Actuals RE 23-24 BE 24-25 change
22-23 RE to
budgets). Key Bills passed include the Women’s
BE
Reservation Bill, 2023, the J&K Reorganisation Bill, Total
41,93,157 44,90,486 47,65,768 6.1%
2019, Labour Codes, and the Digital Personal Data Expenditure
Protection Bill, 2023. Three Bills replacing the IPC Total receipts
(excluding 24,55,402 27,55,713 30,80,274 11.8%
1860, the CrPC, 1973, and the Indian Evidence Act,
borrowings)
1872, were also passed. At the end of the 17th Lok
Revenue Deficit 10,69,926 8,40,527 6,53,383 -22.3%
Sabha, four Bills will lapse, and 20 will remain pending
% of GDP 3.9% 2.8% 2% -
in Rajya Sabha.
Fiscal Deficit 17,37,755 17,34,773 16,85,494 -2.8%
% of GDP 6.4% 5.8% 5.1% -
For details of the functioning of Parliament during the
Note: RE is revised estimates, BE is Budget Estimates
term of the 17th Lok Sabha, please see here. For data
Source: Interim Union Budget documents 2024-25; PRS.
on the participation of Members, see here. For more
For a PRS analysis of the Interim Union Budget 2024-
details on the legislative business transacted during this
25, see here.
period, see here.
Macroeconomic Development
Interim Union Budget 2024-25
Tushar Chakrabarty (tushar@prsindia.org)
Pratinav Damani (pratinav@prsindia.org)
GDP grew by 8.4% in third quarter of 2023-24
Interim Union Budget 2024-25 presented
Gross Domestic Product (GDP) (at constant 2011-12
The Finance Minister, Ms Nirmala Sitharaman
presented the 2024-25 Interim Union Budget.1 Key prices) grew by 8.4% in the third quarter (October-
December) of 2023-24. 2 In the corresponding quarter
highlights of the Budget include:
of 2022-23, it grew by 4.3%.3 In the second quarter
▪ Expenditure: The government has proposed to (July-September) of 2023-24, GDP grew by 8.1%.
spend Rs 47,65,768 crore in 2024-25, which is an
According to the Second Advance Estimates, GDP is
increase of 6.1% over the revised estimates of
estimated to grow by 7.6% for the year 2023-24, higher
2023-24 (Rs 44,90,486 crore).
than the growth rate of 7.3% as per the First Advance
▪ Receipts: The receipts (other than borrowings) in Estimate released in January 2024.4 Separately, the
2024-25 are expected to be Rs 30,80,274 crore, Ministry of Statistics and Programme Implementation
which is an increase of 11.8% over the revised has decided to discontinue the release of third revised
estimates of 2023-24 (Rs 27,55,713 crore). estimates of GDP figures from 2021-22 onwards.5
▪ GDP growth: The nominal GDP growth rate has GDP across economic sectors is measured in terms of
been estimated at 10.5% in 2024-25 (i.e. not Gross Value Added (GVA). In the third quarter of
adjusted for inflation). 2023-24, manufacturing is estimated to increase by
11.6%, followed by construction at 9.5%. Agriculture
▪ Deficits: In 2024-25, the fiscal deficit is targeted
is estimated to contract by 0.8% in the same period.
at 5.1% of GDP, lower than the revised estimates
Note that while the GVA in third quarter of 2023-24
of 5.8% of GDP in 2023-24. Revenue deficit in
grew at 6.5%, GDP growth is estimated to be higher at
2024-25 is targeted at 2% of GDP, which is lower
8.4%. This could be due to the 32% growth in net
than the revised estimates of 2.8% of GDP in
taxes (difference between taxes and subsidies) which is
2023-24.
added to the GVA to arrive at GDP figures.
▪ Tax proposals: No changes in direct and indirect
taxes have been proposed
▪ Policy proposals: An additional two crore houses
will be built over the next five years under the PM
- 2-
Monthly Policy Review – February 2024 PRS Legislative Research
Figure 1: Growth in GDP (%, year-on-year) Industrial production grew by 5.8% in third
quarter of 2023-24
14% 12.8%
12% The Index of Industrial Production (IIP) grew by 5.8%
in the third quarter (October-December) of 2023-24,
10%
8.2% 8.1% 8.4% compared to an increase of 2.8% in the same period in
8% 2022-23.8,9 Mining increased by 8.2% in the third
6.2%
5.5% quarter of 2023-24, higher than an increase of 7.6% in
6%
4.3% the corresponding period of 2022-23. Manufacturing
4% increased by 5% while electricity increased by 9% in
the third quarter of 2023-24.
2%
0% Figure 2: Growth in IIP (%, year-on-year)
Q1 Q2 Q3 Q4 Q1 Q2 Q3
25%
2022-23 2023-24
20%
Sources: Ministry of Statistics and Programme Implementation; PRS.
15%
Table 2: Growth in GVA across sectors (%, year-
on-year) 10% 8.2% 9.0%
Sector Q3 Q2 Q3 5.8% 5.0%
2022-23 2023-24 2023-24 5%
Agriculture 5.2% 1.6% -0.8%
0%
Mining 1.4% 11.1% 7.5%
IIP Mining Mfg Electricity
Manufacturing -4.8% 14.4% 11.6%
Oct-23 Nov-23 Dec-23 Oct-Dec 23
Electricity 8.7% 10.5% 9.0%
Construction 9.5% 13.5% 9.5% Sources: Ministry of Statistics and Programme Implementation; PRS.
Trade 9.2% 4.5% 6.7%
Financial Services 7.7% 6.2% 7.0%
Public Services 3.5% 7.7% 7.5% Law and Justice
GVA 4.8% 7.7% 6.5%
Rutvik Upadhyaya (rutvik@prsindia.org)
GDP 4.3% 8.1% 8.4%
Note: GVA is GDP without net taxes on products. Supreme Court struck down the electoral
Sources: Ministry of Statistics and Programme Implementation; PRS.
bonds scheme
Repo rate kept unchanged at 6.5% A five-judge bench held the electoral bonds scheme to
be unconstitutional.10 The scheme was introduced
The Monetary Policy Committee (MPC) of the Reserve
through the Finance Act, 2017.11 An electoral bond is
Bank of India kept the policy repo rate (the rate at
an instrument that can be used to make donations to a
which RBI lends money to banks) unchanged at 6.5%.6
political party.12 Any Indian citizen or a company is
The repo rate has been unchanged since February 2023
eligible to buy an electoral bond.12 These do not carry
when it was increased from 6.25% to 6.5%.7 Other
the name of the purchaser. Political parties are also not
decisions of the Committee include:
required to publicly disclose donations received via
▪ The standing deposit facility rate (the rate at which electoral bonds. The Finance Act, 2017 also amended
RBI borrows from banks without giving collateral) the Companies Act, 2013 to remove the ceiling on the
has been retained at 6.25%. amount of contributions companies can make to
political parties. It also removed the requirement for
▪ The marginal standing facility rate (the rate at
companies to disclose the name of the parties to which
which banks can borrow additional money from
contributions have been made.
RBI) and the bank rate (rate at which RBI buys
bills of exchange) have been retained at 6.75%. The Court examined two questions: (i) whether
unlimited corporate funding to political parties was
The MPC decided to remain focused on withdrawal of
violative of free and fair elections, and (ii) whether the
accommodation. This is expected to ensure that
right of political parties to keep voluntary contributions
inflation progressively aligns with the target of 4%,
undisclosed supersedes voters’ right to information to
while supporting growth.
know about the same.10 The Court held that electoral
bonds violate the voter’s right to information under
Article 19(1)(a) (right to free speech expression). It
also held that allowing unlimited corporate
- 3-
Monthly Policy Review – February 2024 PRS Legislative Research
contributions to political parties is arbitrary and For a PRS Summary of the Bill, see here.
violates article 14 (right to equality before law).10
Parliament passes Bill modifying the list of
The Supreme Court also directed the State Bank of
Scheduled Castes and Tribes in Odisha and
India (SBI) to stop issuing electoral bonds.10 SBI has
Andhra Pradesh
also been directed to submit the details of political
parties which have received contributions through these
The Constitution (Scheduled Castes and Scheduled
bonds since 12 April, 2019.10 SBI must disclose the
Tribes) Orders (Amendment) Bill, 2024 and The
details of each electoral bond encashed by political
Constitution (Scheduled Tribes) Order (Amendment)
parties to the Election Commission of India (ECI) by
Bill, 2024 were passed in Parliament.14,15 The Bills
March 6, 2024. The ECI must publish this information
amend the Constitution (Scheduled Castes) Order, 1950
on its website by March 13, 2024.
and the Constitution (Scheduled Tribes) Order, 1950 in
relation to Odisha and Andhra Pradesh.
Parliament passes Bill amending local bodies
Scheduled Tribes in Odisha: The Bill adds following
laws of Jammu and Kashmir
communities to the list of Scheduled Tribes in Odisha:
The Jammu and Kashmir Local Bodies Laws (i) Muka Dora, Mooka Dora, Nuka Dora, Nooka Dora
(Amendment) Bill, 2024 was passed by Parliament .13 (for districts of Koraput, Nowrangapur, Rayagada, and
The Bill amends three laws applicable to local bodies Malkangiri), and (ii) Konda Reddy, Konda Reddi.
in the UT of Jammu and Kashmir (J&K). These are: (i)
Scheduled Tribes in Andhra Pradesh: The Bill adds
the J&K Panchayati Raj Act, 1989, (ii) the J&K
the following to the list of Scheduled Tribes in Andhra
Municipal Act, 2000 and (iii) the J&K Municipal
Pradesh: (i) Bondo Porja, (ii) Khond Porja, and (iii)
Corporation Act, 2000. Key features include:
Konda Savaras.
▪ Reservations for Other Backward Classes
For a PRS Summary of the two Bills, see here and here.
(OBCs): Under the three Acts, seats in certain
institutions in J&K are reserved for Scheduled
Law Commission submits report on various
Castes (SCs) and Scheduled Tribes (STs). The
institutions are: (i) panchayats, (ii) municipalities, subjects
(iii) municipal corporations, (iv) block
The Law Commission of India submitted its reports on:
development councils and (v) district development
(i) ‘The Law on Criminal Defamation’, (ii) ‘A
councils. The reserved seats are proportional to
Comprehensive Review of the Epidemic Diseases Act,
the population of these groups in the area covered
1897’, and (iii) ‘Law on Matrimonial Issues relating to
by the respective institution. One-third of such
Non-resident Indians and Overseas citizens of
seats are reserved for women. The Bill extends
India’.16,17,18 Key observations and recommendations
reservation to OBCs as well. OBCs are groups
of the Commission include:
notified as weak and under-privileged by the
Government of the union territory of J&K. ▪ Criminal Defamation: The Commission noted
that right to reputation is an integral part of an
▪ Mandate of the State Election Commission:
individual’s right to life and liberty. It cannot be
Currently, under the J&K Panchayati Raj Act,
jeopardised by the right to freedom of expression.
1989, the State Election Commission in J&K
Thus, criminal defamation is a protection that can
prepares the electoral rolls and conducts elections
be availed upon damage to one’s reputation, and
for panchayats, block development councils and
should be read harmoniously with the right to
district development councils. These
freedom of speech. The Commission
responsibilities are discharged by the Chief
recommended retaining criminal defamation within
Electoral Officer in the case of municipalities and
the criminal laws of the country.
municipal corporations. The Bill designates the
election-related responsibilities of these ▪ Epidemic Diseases Act: The Commission
institutions to the State Election Commission. observed several shortcomings in the Epidemic
Diseases Act, 1897. These include: (i) absence of
▪ Removal of State Election Commissioner: The
a definition of epidemic, (ii) no differentiation
J&K Panchayati Raj Act, 1989 states that the State
between an outbreak, epidemic and pandemic, (iii)
Election Commissioner can only be removed from
lack of guidelines for isolation, quarantine, and
his office through an order passed by the
disease surveillance, and (iv) unclear distribution
Lieutenant Governor. Grounds for dismissal
of powers between the centre, state, and local
include misbehaviour or incapacity proved by an
bodies to regulate epidemics.
inquiry led by a sitting or retired High Court judge.
The Bill amends this to provide that a State ▪ The Commission recommended definitions of
Election Commissioner can only be removed in the outbreak, epidemic, and pandemic. It
same manner and on the same grounds as a High differentiated the three based on geographical
Court judge. spread of disease and abnormality of transmission.
The Commission also recommended that states
- 4-
Monthly Policy Review – February 2024 PRS Legislative Research
should be primarily responsible for prevention and Department of Justice to consider enhancing the
management of epidemics, since public health and allocation of funds to such states.
sanitation is a state subject under the Constitution.
▪ High Court for Nagaland: The Committee noted
However, both centre and states should frame laws
that states like Tripura, Meghalaya, and Manipur,
on prevention of infectious diseases as it falls
which came under the jurisdiction of the Gauhati
under the Concurrent List. It recommended that
High Court till 1971, now have their own High
the central government should frame an Epidemic
Courts. However, Nagaland is still under the
Plan for dealing with outbreaks, epidemics, or
jurisdiction of the Gauhati High Court. The
pandemics across the country. States can make
Committee found merit in the demand for a
specific regulations with local authorities.
separate High Court for Nagaland and
▪ Matrimonial Issues related to NRIs and OCIs: recommended the Ministry of Law and Justice to
The Commission raised the issue of Non- coordinate with the Ministry of Home Affairs to
residential Indian (NRI) husbands deserting their address this demand.
Indian wives. It noted that the NRI Bill, 2019 did
not contain a comprehensive definition of an NRI. Standing Committee submits report on
Moreover, laws on marriage in India neither strengthening legal education
provide information on NRI spouses and neither
contain provisions to issue summons to them. The The Standing Committee on Personnel, Public
Committee recommended defining an NRI as an Grievances, Law and Justice (Chair: Mr. Sushil Kumar
Indian citizen residing abroad for any purpose, Modi) submitted its report on the ‘Strengthening Legal
save tourism. It recommended compulsory Education in View of Emerging Challenges before the
registration of marriages of NRIs and OCIs. It also Legal Profession’.20 According to the Advocates Act,
recommended adding certain provisions such as 1961, the Bar Council of India is responsible for: (i)
divorce and child maintenance under the NRI Bill, regulating standards of legal education, (ii) recognising
2019. It also recommended amending the 2019 universities that offer degrees in law, and (iii)
Bill to mandate the NRI defaulter to appear in inspecting these universities for their compliance with
Court in matrimonial matters. set standards. Key observations and recommendations
of the Committee are as follows:
Standing Committee submits report on judicial ▪ Powers of the Bar Council of India (BCI): The
infrastructure in North-East India Committee noted that the Advocates Act, 1961
was passed with a narrow view of producing
The Standing Committee on Personnel, Public
lawyers for courts. It opined that legal education
Grievances, Law and Justice (Chair: Mr Sushil Kumar
should impart skills required for legal practice
Modi) submitted its report on ‘Judicial Infrastructure in
beyond courtrooms. The Committee
the North-Eastern States of India’.19 Since 1993-94, a
recommended that BCI’s powers should be limited
centrally sponsored scheme (CSS) is being
to regulating basic eligibility for practicing at the
implemented for developing infrastructure facilities for
bar. Regulation of legal education beyond this
subordinate judiciary. For North-Eastern states,
should be entrusted with an independent authority.
alongwith Uttarakhand and Himachal Pradesh, the
It suggested that a National Council for Legal
centre bears 90% of the contribution under the scheme.
Education and Research be established under the
Key observations and recommendations of the
proposed Higher Education Commission of India.
Committee include:
▪ The Committee noted that inefficiency and
▪ Criteria for the release of funds: New guidelines
inadequacy of the inspection process by the BCI
for the release of funds under the CSS include
has led to the recognition of substandard law
utilising at least 75% of the disbursed funds before
colleges. It highlighted that while recognising new
further instalments are given. The Committee
colleges, due consideration should be given to
observed that no funds were released to Mizoram,
quality over quantity. It recommended taking
Nagaland and Tripura in 2022-23, due to their
effective measures to curb the growth in
failure in complying with revised norms. It noted
substandard law colleges.
that north-eastern states face several geographical
and infrastructural challenges that make movement ▪ Uniform curriculum: The Committee noted that
of material difficult. They also face delays in differences in the curriculum between law colleges
receiving project proposals and utilisation and universities leads to unevenness. These
certificates. The Committee recommended for differences arise out of law colleges and
such reasons to be considered while prescribing the universities adopting the curriculum of affiliating
criteria for the release of funds. It also universities, and deviating from that prescribed by
recommended the existing criteria be relaxed. the BCI. The Committee recommended redefining
the role of the BCI and ensuring that the BCI sets a
▪ The Committee also noted that some north-eastern
uniform curriculum for undergraduate courses in
states are unable to contribute 10% of the project
law colleges and universities. For post-graduate
funds from their end. It recommended the
- 5-
Monthly Policy Review – February 2024 PRS Legislative Research
education, a uniform curriculum should be set by Education
the proposed independent authority.
Parliament passes Bill prohibiting the use of
For a PRS Summary of the report, see here.
unfair means in public examinations
Rutvik Upadhyaya (rutvik@prsindia.org)
Environment The Public Examinations (Prevention of Unfair Means)
Bill, 2024 was passed by Parliament.23 The Bill seeks
Tanvi Vipra (tanvi@prsindia.org)
to prevent use of unfair means in public examinations.
Public examinations refer to examinations conducted
Water (Prevention and Control of Pollution)
by authorities specified under the Schedule to the Bill,
Amendment Bill, 2024 passed by Parliament or notified by the central government. These include:
(i) Union Public Service Commission, (ii) Staff
Parliament passed the Water (Prevention and Control of
Selection Commission, (iii) Railway Recruitment
Pollution) Amendment Bill, 2024.21 It amends the
Board, (iv) National Testing Agency, (v) Institute of
Water (Prevention and Control of Pollution) Act,
Banking Personnel Selection, and (vi) Departments of
1974.22 The Act establishes the central and state
the central government and their attached offices for
pollution control boards (CPCB and SPCBs) to prevent
recruitment. Key features of the Bill include:
and control water pollution. The Bill decriminalises
several violations, and instead imposes penalties. It will ▪ Offences in relation to public examinations:
initially apply to Himachal Pradesh, Rajasthan, and the The Bill defines several offences in relation to
union territories. Other states may pass resolutions to public examinations. It prohibits collusion or
extend its applicability to their states. conspiracy to facilitate indulgence in any unfair
means. It specifies unfair means to include: (i)
▪ Consent exemptions for establishing industries:
unauthorised access or leakage of question paper
As per the Act, prior consent of the SPCB is
or answer key, (ii) assisting a candidate during a
required for establishing any industry or treatment
public examination, (iii) tampering with computer
plant, which is likely to discharge sewage into a
network or resources, (iv) tampering with
water body, sewer, or land. The Bill specifies that
documents for shortlisting or finalising of merit list
the central government, in consultation with the
or rank, and (v) conducting fake examination,
CPCB, may exempt certain categories of industrial
issuing fake admit cards or offer letters to cheat,
plants from obtaining such consent. The Bill also
for monetary gain. It also prohibits: (i) disclosing
adds that the central government may issue
exam-related confidential information before time,
guidelines for the grant, refusal, or cancellation of
and (ii) unauthorised people from entering exam
consent granted by the SPCB.
centres to create disruptions. Above offences will
▪ Under the Act, establishing and operating an be punishable with imprisonment between three
industry without obtaining such consent from the and five years, and a fine up to Rs 10 lakh.
SPCB is punishable with imprisonment up to six
▪ Responsibilities of service providers: In the
years and fine. The Bill retains this. It also
event of violation of provisions of the Bill, service
penalises tampering with monitoring devices used
providers must report to the police and the
in determining whether any industry or treatment
concerned examination authority. A service
plant can be set up. The penalty will be between Rs
provider is an organisation that provides computer
10,000 and Rs 15 lakh.
resources or any other support to a public
▪ Discharge of polluting matter: Under the Act, the examination authority. Failure to report such
SPCB may issue directions to immediately restrain incidents will be an offence. In case, the service
any activity which is leading to discharge of provider themselves commit an offence, the
noxious or polluting matter in water bodies. The examination authority must report it to the police.
Act also prohibits violation of standards (laid down An offence by a service provider will be
by SPCB) regarding polluting matter in water punishable with a fine of up to one crore rupees.
bodies or on land, barring some exemptions. Proportionate cost of examination will also be
Exemptions include depositing non-polluting recovered from such a service provider. Further,
materials on the bank of a stream for reclaiming they will also be barred from conducting public
land. Violation of these provisions is punishable examinations for four years.
with an imprisonment term between one and a half
For a PRS summary of the Bill, see here.
years and six years, and a fine. The Bill removes
the punishment and instead, imposes a penalty
between Rs 10,000 and Rs 15 lakh.
For a PRS Summary of the Bill, see here.
- 6-
Monthly Policy Review – February 2024 PRS Legislative Research
UGC releases guidelines on internship for ▪ Misleading ads: An advertisement will be
undergraduate students considered misleading if it: (i) conceals important
information which can influence a consumer’s
Rutvik Upadhyaya (rutvik@prsindia.org)
decision to choose their services, such as duration
or cost of the course, (ii) makes false claims
The University Grants Commission (UGC) released the
regarding success rates or rankings of students in a
‘Guidelines for Internship/Research Internship for
competitive exam, (iii) falsely represents that
Undergraduate Students’.24 The guidelines broadly
students’ success is solely attributable to the
categorise internships into two kinds: (i) internships to
coaching, or (iv) creates a false sense of urgency or
enhance employability, and (ii) internships to develop
fear of missing out that may heighten anxiety
research aptitude. Some key features of the guidelines
among students or parents.
are as follows:
▪ Obligations: Every person engaged in coaching
▪ Responsibilities of officers at the HEI: The
will have certain obligations. These include
guidelines require Higher Education Institutions
disclosing the rank and course duration of each
(HEIs) to designate a: (i) nodal officer, (ii)
successful candidate, putting prominent
internship supervisor and (iii) mentor. HEIs
disclaimers in ads, accurately representing
include colleges and universities recognised by the
available facilities and resources, and avoiding
UGC. Different internship-related responsibilities
cherry picking of exceptional cases to create a
are assigned to each official. A nodal officer is
skewed impression of success.
expected to (i) identify areas for internships, (ii)
reach out to various organisations for opportunities ▪ Prohibited activities: Persons engaged in
and (iii) sign agreements to facilitate internships. coaching must not use details of successful
An internship supervisor is expected to monitor candidates without their express consent. They
activities of students at the internship. A mentor is must also not: (i) use fake reviews or make false
expected to guide the students throughout the claims such as 100% selection or 100% job
internship and validate their performance. guaranteed, (iii) lead consumers to believe that
enrolment will guarantee a rank, job, admission
▪ Process: Every HEI is expected to set up an
etc, or (iv) mislead or make exaggerated claims
internship portal that registers organisations,
about faculty credentials.
experts, and faculty. Students may apply for
internships through the portal. HEIs must provide Comments are invited until March 16, 2024.
for digital or group internships for students who
fail to obtain an internship in the physical mode.
On the completion of the internship, students will
Commerce
be evaluated on their performance by their
internship supervisor.
Tushar Chakrabarty (tushar@prsindia.org)
▪ Credits: HEIs can mandate minimum two to four
internship credits for a three or four-year Cabinet approved amendments to FDI policy
undergraduate course with Honours. Internships for space sector
should be conducted in the fourth semester for a
duration of 60-120 hours. The Union Cabinet approved amendments to the
foreign direct investment (FDI) policy for the space
▪ For a four-year undergraduate degree with honours sector.27 Under the existing policy, 100% FDI is
and research, HEIs must provide for a mandatory
allowed for establishment and operation of satellites
dissertation or research project of 12 credits. This under the government approval route.28 As per the
must be placed in the eighth semester and involve
amended policy, up to 74% FDI will be allowed for
360 hours of work.
satellite manufacturing and operation, satellite data
products, ground segment and user segment under the
Comments invited on guidelines for prevention automatic route. FDI beyond 74% will be subject to
of misleading coaching ads government approval. FDI up to 49% under the
automatic route will be allowed for launch vehicles and
Tanvi Vipra (tanvi@prsindia.org)
spaceports, beyond which it will be subject to
government approval. 100% FDI under the automatic
The Central Consumer Protection Authority released
route has been allowed for manufacturing of
draft Guidelines for Prevention of Misleading
components and systems/sub-systems for satellites.
Advertisement in Coaching Sector.25 The Guidelines
have been issued under the Consumer Protection Act,
Standing Committee submits report on
2019.26 Coaching refers to tuition, instructions,
strategy to maximise exports and minimise
academic support, or guidance provided by any person.
The Guidelines apply to all advertisements. Key imports
features of the Guidelines are:
The Standing Committee on Commerce (Chair: Dr.
- 7-
Monthly Policy Review – February 2024 PRS Legislative Research
Abhishek Manu Singhvi) submitted its report on supersede multiple regulations dealing with subjects
‘Comprehensive Strategy to Map Major Products and such as insurance premiums, issuance of insurance
Countries to Maximise Exports and Minimise policies, and protection of policyholders’ interests. The
Imports’.29 Key observations and recommendations of regulations will apply to all insurers and distributors,
the Committee include: barring entities offering reinsurance. Key features are
as follows:
▪ Import of petroleum products: One-third of
India’s total imports comprise crude petroleum, ▪ Free look period: Policyholders of life and
coal, coke, and other petroleum products. The individual health insurance policies must be
Committee noted the need to enhance their provided with a 30-day free look period from the
domestic production by incentivising exploration date of receiving the policy document. If the
and extraction of hydrocarbons from fossil fuels. policyholder disagrees with any conditions of the
Shift from traditional fuel-based vehicles to policy within this period, he may choose the cancel
electric vehicles is also essential to reduce imports the policy. On cancellation, the premium paid
of petroleum products. must be refunded to the policyholder. Currently, a
free look period of 15 days is allowed for physical
▪ Engineering exports: India’s engineering exports
policies and 30 days for electronic policies and
account for over 25% of total merchandise exports.
those obtained through distance mode.31
In 2022-23, India exported engineering goods
worth USD 107 billion. The Committee noted that ▪ Issuance of insurance policies: All insurers must
tariff and non-tariff barriers imposed by the USA have a policy for issuing insurance policies in
and the European Union (EU) can hinder the electronic form. It should cover: (i) measures to
growth of India’s engineering exports. This safeguard data privacy, (ii) framework on data
includes the Carbon Border Adjustment security, and (iii) continuous review and
Mechanism (CBAM) imposed by the EU which upgradation of cyber security safeguards.
can led to additional import duties on various
▪ Principles for serving policyholders: Insurers
products such as fertiliser, aluminium, and cement.
must follow certain principles for servicing
The Committee noted that Indian manufacturers in
policyholders. These include: (i) providing
the MSME sector may not have the financial
policyholders with necessary information about
resources needed to counter the CBAM. The
various services, (ii) delivering services within a
Committee recommended the government to seek
reasonable time, and (iii) not pressuring
an extension on the application of CBAM on the
policyholders to change products or providers.
MSME sector by at least three years.
Comments are invited by March 4, 2024.
▪ Remission of Duties or Taxes on Export
Products (RoDTEP) Scheme: The RoDTEP
SEBI issues consultation paper on timelines for
scheme is being implemented from January 2021
disclosures by foreign portfolio investors
for duty remission on exports. It reimburses taxes,
duties, and levies which are not covered by any
The Securities and Exchange Board of India (SEBI)
other refund mechanism. The Committee noted
issued a consultation paper on relaxation of timelines
that the low rate of remission provided under the
for certain disclosures by foreign portfolio investors
scheme makes Indian exports uncompetitive. It (FPIs).32 Currently, FPIs are required to disclose
recommended that the RoDTEP Committee
certain material changes within seven working days.
examining the rates for various sectors should give
These include changes in ownership or control,
its report expeditiously. The Committee also
findings of investigations by overseas regulators, and if
recommended increasing the number of products
any previously disclosed information is found to be
covered by the scheme.
false or misleading. SEBI has proposed to categorise
For a PRS summary of the report, see here. material changes into: (i) type I changes such as
acquisition/merger/demerger, change in regulatory
status, and restructuring of the FPI’s legal form, and (ii)
type II changes which would cover all changes not
Finance categorised as type I. Type I material changes must be
disclosed by the FPIs within seven working days. Type
Tushar Chakrabarty (tushar@prsindia.org) II material changes must be disclosed within 30 days.
SEBI releases consultation paper on ease of
IRDAI issues draft regulations for protection of
doing business for mutual funds
interest of policyholders
The Securities and Exchange Board of India (SEBI)
The Insurance Regulatory and Development Authority
issued a consultation paper on ease of doing business
of India (IRDAI) issued the draft IRDAI (Protection of
for mutual funds.33 Mutual funds pool money from
Policyholders’ Interests and Allied Matters of Insurers)
investors to invest in financial instruments. Key
Regulations, 2024.30 The draft regulations propose to
proposals include:
- 8-
Monthly Policy Review – February 2024 PRS Legislative Research
▪ Appointment of fund manager: Currently, disclosures must be provided as part of the
dedicated fund managers must be appointed for financial results.
commodity-based funds and for funds making
Comments are invited by April 30, 2024.35
overseas investments. A SEBI working group has
observed that dedicated funds managers lead to
Standing Committee submits report on
additional costs. Moreover, fund management
insurance sector
companies already hire sectoral research analysts.
The working group has proposed that appointment
The Standing Committee on Finance (Chair: Mr. Jayant
of dedicated funds mangers may be made optional
Sinha) submitted its report on ‘Performance Review
for commodity and overseas investment. and Regulation of Insurance Sector’.36 Key
However, the asset management company must
observations and recommendations of the Committee
ensure that that fund manager appointed has the
are as follows:
required expertise for investment in commodities
and overseas securities. ▪ Insurance coverage: In 2021-22, insurance
penetration (percentage of insurance premium to
▪ Nomination for mutual fund units: Single and
GDP) in India was 4.2% as compared to the global
joint mutual fund unit holders must either provide
average of 7%. Similarly, India’s insurance
a nominee or opt out of nomination by June 30,
density (ratio of premium to population) was USD
2024. The working group noted that for jointly
91, lower than the global average of USD 874.
held mutual fund units, the surviving holder takes
The Committee noted that there is a need to create
precedence over the nominee. It has proposed to
mass awareness about the benefits of insurance
make nomination optional for jointly held units.
protection and diverse insurance products.
Comments are invited by March 15, 2024.
▪ Composite license for insurance business: The
Insurance Act, 1938 and the regulations of the
RBI releases draft disclosure framework for Insurance Regulatory Development Authority of
climate related financial risks India (IRDAI) do not allow composite licensing to
provide life, general, or health insurance under one
The Reserve Bank of India (RBI) released the draft
entity. The Committee noted that providing
disclosure framework for climate related financial
composite licenses can reduce costs and
risks.34 It would apply to RBI regulated entities such as
compliances of insurers. It can also allow
banks, all-India financial institutions (such as
customers to access all-in-one insurance from a
NABARD and National Housing Bank), and non-
single insurance provider. The Committee
banking financial companies. RBI noted that given the
recommended introducing a provision for
increasing importance of climate-related financial risks,
composite licensing of insurance companies and
there is a need for their structured disclosure. Climate-
make related amendments in the legislation.
related financial risks include potential risks from
climate change or efforts to mitigate climate change. ▪ Settlement of claims: Some private companies
Key features include: are offering heavy discounts on premiums due to
competition in the sector. As the premium
▪ Thematic pillars of disclosure: The framework
collected by companies falls short, they resort to
identifies four thematic pillars of disclosure: (i)
repudiation/delay in payment of large claims. The
governance, (ii) strategy, (iii) risk management,
Committee recommended that such cases should
and (iv) metrics and targets. The governance
be deterred by levying heavy penalties. Any new
disclosures should include processes, controls, and
legislation being considered by the government
procedures for identifying and managing climate-
should also seek to address this issue.
related financial risks and opportunities. Strategy
disclosures include: (i) impact of climate-related For a PRS summary of the report, see here.
risks and opportunities on the business and (ii)
resilience of the entity after considering various
climate scenarios. Risk management disclosures
include processes used to manage climate-related Agriculture
risks. The disclosures for metrics and targets
should include progress towards climate-related Tanvi Vipra (tanvi@prsindia.org)
targets set by the entity such as financing for
climate-related risks. Central sector scheme for fisheries approved
▪ Timeline: All regulated entities, barring certain The Union Cabinet approved the Pradhan Mantri
urban cooperative banks, must provide disclosures Matsya Kisan Samridhi Sah-Yojana (PM-MKSSY).37
related to governance, strategy, and risk It is sub-scheme under the central sector scheme PM
management from 2025-26 onwards and for Matsya Sampada Yojana. The new scheme seeks to
metrics and targets from 2027-28 onwards. The formalise the fisheries sector and support small and
micro fisheries enterprises. Key components of the
- 9-
Monthly Policy Review – February 2024 PRS Legislative Research
scheme include: employs about 28 million people directly. The
Committee noted the growth potential of the
▪ Formalising unorganised fisheries sector: The
sector, and its possible contributions to
new scheme seeks to gradually formalise the
government revenue. The sector grew by 9%
sector, through self-registration of fishers, fish
during 2015-16 and 2020-21 (at constant prices).
farmers, and other supportive workers. The
Fish is a cheap source of protein, and has potential
registration will be done on a digital platform,
to contribute to food security as well. Under
which will also be used for disbursing financial
PMMSY, the central government has set a
incentives, and for carrying out training.
production target of 22 million metric tonnes of
▪ Encouraging adoption of aquaculture fish by 2025. Currently, the Indian Council of
insurance: An insurance product that covers at Agricultural Research (ICAR) carries out national
least one lakh hectares of aquaculture farms will be fishery research. The Committee suggested that
created. A one-time incentive of up to one lakh given the importance of the sector, a separate
rupees against purchase of insurance will be research council should be constituted.
provided to small farmers.
For a PRS Summary of the report, see here.
▪ Improving efficiency of value chains: Efficiency
of value chain is sought to be improved through Standing Committee submits report on climate
performance grants. This is expected to incentivise resilient farming
microenterprises to reengage in production,
The Standing Committee on Agriculture, Animal
creation and maintenance of jobs. For the general
Husbandry and Food Processing (Chair: Mr. P.C.
category, the performance grant will not exceed
Gaddigoudar) presented its report on ‘Promotion of
25% of the total investment or Rs 35 lakh,
Climate Resilient Farming’.39 Climate change harms
whichever is lower.
crop yields and agricultural productivity. Its impact
▪ Adopting product safety and quality system: can be mitigated if institutional and policy support is
Micro and small enterprises will be incentivised to provided for adapting to the changes. Key observations
adopt safety and quality assurance systems in and recommendations of the Committee include:
marketing fish and fishery products. Similar
▪ Crop diversification: Diversification of crops
performance grants will be provided for adopting
enables agricultural ecosystems to adapt to climate
these standards.
change. However, the Committee observed that
The Scheme will have an estimated outlay of Rs 6,000 current policies and development interventions
crore over four years until 2026-27. 50% of the cost of offer inadequate assistance to diversify crops. In
the scheme is being anticipated as investment from addition to mitigating the effects of climate
beneficiaries and private sector. change, crop diversity also helps in ensuring food
security, enhancing soil fertility, controlling pests,
Standing Committee submits report on and bringing yield stability. The Committee
employment and revenue earning potential of suggested that the Ministry of Agriculture and
fisheries Farmers Welfare provide all possible assistance to
farmers to achieve this.
The Standing Committee on Fisheries, Animal
Husbandry and Dairying (Chair: Mr. P.C. ▪ Water conservation: Management of water
Gaddigoudar) presented its report on ‘Employment resources is a key feature of sustainable
Generation and Revenue Earning Potential of Fisheries agriculture. The Committee noted that irrigation
Sector’.38 Key findings and recommendations of the infrastructure needs to be upgraded, especially in
Committee are as follows: north-western India. It is the country’s food basket
and is prone to climate-induced droughts. The
▪ Employment generation in fisheries: Jobs in the
Committee also noted that drip irrigation is
fisheries sector range from production and sale of
currently only adopted for high-value horticultural
inputs, fishing, fish-farming, processing, to
crops. It suggested that the government take a
marketing and distribution. These may be
nuanced stance on electricity subsidy meant for
informal small scale or highly organised and
drawing groundwater. The Committee noted that
industrial operations. The Department of Fisheries
it is a major contributor towards declining
seeks to generate 55 lakh jobs by 2024-25 under
groundwater levels. It suggested using algorithms
PM Matsya Sampada Yojana (PMMSY). The
that optimise irrigation schedules, and minimise
Committee recommended that to generate
environmental impact.
employment opportunities, investments in areas
such as exports, post-harvest processing, and ▪ Potential impact and mitigation measures:
import substitution should be increased. Developing countries are more vulnerable to
climate risks since they rely on agriculture. This is
▪ Fisheries industry: Fisheries contribute 6.7% to
because they lack necessary technologies and
gross value added of the agriculture sector and
finances for risk management. Without mitigation
- 10-
Monthly Policy Review – February 2024 PRS Legislative Research
and adaption measures, poor farmers may remain and Farmers’ Rights Authority, to encourage
trapped in a cycle of low income, high debt, and private participation in their development.
poverty. These effects can be mitigated through
For a PRS Summary of the report, see here.
integrated approaches such as technological
advancements and data sciences. The Committee
suggested that the National Innovations in Climate
Resilient Agriculture (NICRA) Scheme should be
Information Technology
implemented in all risk vulnerable villages to
protect farmers from climate and meteorological
Pratinav Damani (pratinav@prsindia.org)
incidents. NICRA (2011) aims to promote climate
resilient agricultural technologies in vulnerable Home secretary required to destroy records of
areas of the country.
interception under IT Amendment Rules
For a PRS summary of the report, see here
The Ministry of Electronics and Information
Technology notified the Information Technology
Standing Committee submits report on
(Procedure and Safeguards for Interception, Monitoring
development of cotton sector
and Decryption of Information) Amendment Rules,
2024.41 The principal Rules were notified in 2009.42
The Standing Committee on Labour, Textiles and Skill
The Rules have been issued under Information
Development (Chair: Mr. Bhartruhari Mahtab)
Technology Act, 2000, which allow for the
presented its report on ‘Development of Cotton
Sector’.40 Key observations and recommendations of interception, monitoring and decryption of data under
specified grounds.43
the Committee include:
As per the 2009 Rules, the security agency must
▪ Low productivity of cotton: Cotton productivity
destroy all records pertaining to the interception,
in India is about 447 kg per hectare, significantly
monitoring and decryption of data every six months.
lower than other cotton producing countries such
Records pertaining to directions for such actions must
as Brazil (1,830 kg/hectare) and the USA (1,065
also be destroyed. These records must be destroyed
kg/hectare). The Committee identified several
unless required or likely to be required. The
factors that lead to sub-optimal production. About
amendment adds that the competent authority (under
67% of Indian cotton is dependent on rainfall,
the Rules) must also destroy such records. The
which makes it vulnerable to frequent weather
competent authority is the: (i) Secretary in the Ministry
changes. In areas where the crop is irrigated,
of Home Affairs (in case of the Central Government)
irrigation depends on the release of the canal
and (ii) Secretary in charge of the Home Department
water, and not as per crop needs. The Committee
(in case of a state government or union territory).
suggested taking sustainable steps to bring more
These authorities sanction the action of interception,
cotton cultivation area under irrigation, and that
monitoring, or decryption on behalf of the government.
irrigation must gradually be made demand driven.
▪ The Committee noted that the low productivity Standing Committee submits report on digital
issue is exacerbated as cotton is grown
payments and online security
continuously without crop rotation or residue
management. This causes soil health deterioration. The Standing Committee on Communications and
It recommended that newer farming techniques be Information Technology (Chair: Mr. Prataprao Jadhav)
developed, campaigns for crop health and pest presented its report on ‘Digital Payment and Online
eradication be conducted, and demonstration of Security Measures for Data Protection’.44 Key
best practices be held. observations and recommendations of the Committee
are as follows:
▪ Outdated seed varieties resulting in low
productivity: The Committee also noted that the ▪ Increase in online financial frauds: The
seed technology in use is outdated, and that there is Committee noted that there has been a significant
an urgent need for new variety of seeds. Countries increase in the number of cases and amount of
with high cotton yield such as Mexico have money lost in cybercrime. The number of
completely adopted genetically modified seeds cybercrime complaints rose from 9.7 lakh in 2022
with Bt+ herbicide tolerant traits. It recommended to 11.5 lakh in 2023. Financial frauds are about
that the Ministry augment the development of early 60% of the total complaints. Financial frauds
maturing and hybrid seeds that suit Indian needs. worth Rs 5,574 crore were reported between
The Central Institute for Cotton Research, Nagpur January and October 2023, significantly higher
has suggested that early maturing Bt and non-Bt than 2022 (Rs 2,296 crore in full year). Types of
varieties can be used in 20% of the cotton area financial frauds include customer care number
where long duration Bt hybrid seeds are used. The frauds, KYC-based frauds, and Aadhaar enabled
Committee noted that these seed varieties will need Payment Systems (AePS) based frauds.
to be protected by the Protection of Plant Varieties
- 11-
Monthly Policy Review – February 2024 PRS Legislative Research
▪ The Committee observed that a multipronged Standing Committee submits report on Quality
approach is needed, which involves all concerned of Medical Education in India
Ministries, in preventing cyber-crime. It
Rutvik Upadhyaya (rutvik@prsindia.org)
recommended the Ministry of Home Affairs to
constitute a nodal agency which houses
The Standing Committee on Health and Family
representatives of all the agencies involved.
Welfare (Chair: Mr. Bhubaneswar Kalita) submitted its
▪ AePS-based crimes: An AePS facilitates report on the ‘Quality of Medical Education in India’.50
customers to carry out transactions from their Key observations and recommendations of the
Aadhaar-linked accounts using biometric Committee include:
authentication. The Committee noted that frauds
▪ Limited seats: The Committee observed a
using AePS were increasing. The Ministry of
significant gap between medical aspirants and
Home Affairs submitted that dummy or rubber
availability of seats. At the undergraduate (UG)
fingers were being used to falsify biometric
level, it observed that close to one lakh MBBS
authentication using Aadhaar.
seats were available for over 20 lakh students who
▪ Recovery of money: The Committee noted that appeared for the National Eligibility-cum Entrance
the amount of money recovered and returned to Test (NEET) in 2023-24. At the post-graduate
customers was very low (10.4% between 2021 and (PG) level, around 68,000 seats were available for
2022). It also noted that the method for filing over two lakh aspirants. To ensure greater
complaints was complex and there was a high availability of seats, the Committee recommended:
turnaround time to resolve the complaint. It (i) continuing the initiative to establish medical
recommended that the Ministry of Home Affairs colleges attached to district or referral hospitals,
streamline the process of returning the amounts (ii) offering online and distance learning to
frozen to the victims. increase student intake without overburdening
physical infrastructure, (iii) permitting new
For a PRS Summary of the report, see here.
medical colleges to increase annual intake upto
250 seats, and (iv) encouraging private investment
in medical education.
Health ▪ Uneven distribution of medical colleges: The
Committee observed a vast imbalance in the
Surrogacy rules amended to allow an intending
distribution of medical colleges across states. It
couple to use donor gametes observed that Bihar-Maharashtra, and Rajasthan-
Tamil Nadu are almost equally populated, yet have
Rutvik Upadhyaya (rutvik@prsindia.org)
vastly different availability of medical colleges.
Existing guidelines stipulate minimum bed
The Ministry of Health and Family Welfare released
the Surrogacy (Regulation) Amendment Rules, 2024.45 capacities for teaching hospitals, depending upon
their academic intake. An average bed occupancy
These amend the Surrogacy (Regulation) Rules, 2022,
issued under the Surrogacy (Regulation) Act, 2021.46 rate of 80% is also mandated. The Committee
recommended revising such uniform criteria and to
The Act regulates the practice and process of surrogacy
in India.47 formulate region-specific norm norms.
▪ Cost of medical education: The Committee
The 2022 Rules prohibited the use of donor gametes for
observed that cost of medical education in India
surrogacy (male gametes are sperm; female gametes
are eggs or oocytes).48 A single woman (widow/ ranged from Rs 60 lakh to one crore rupees, and
has increased over time. It recommended
divorcee) must use her own eggs to avail surrogacy. In
measures such as providing need-based
October 2023, the Supreme Court permitted using
scholarships to students and tax concessions to
donor eggs when the woman is unable to produce her
own eggs.49 organisations running medical colleges. To reduce
functioning costs, the Committee recommended
The 2024 amendment allows donor gametes to be used collaboration between private medical colleges and
in surrogacy under certain conditions. It states that district hospitals. It also recommended subsidising
permission for donor gametes will only be granted if: laboratory equipment or machines in private
(i) either the intending husband or wife has a medical medical colleges.
condition necessitating surrogacy, and (ii) the child
For a PRS summary of the report, see here.
born through surrogacy has at least one gamete from
the intending couple.45 The medical condition will be
certified by the District Medical Board. The condition
for single women remains unchanged.
- 12-
Monthly Policy Review – February 2024 PRS Legislative Research
Standing Committee submits report on Standing Committee submits report on
promotion of medical device industry National Ayush Mission
Tanvi Vipra (tanvi@prsindia.org) Rutvik Upadhyaya (rutvik@prsindia.org)
The Standing Committee on Chemicals and Fertilisers The Standing Committee on Health and Family
(Chair: Dr Shashi Tharoor) presented its report on Welfare (Chair: Mr. Bhubaneswar Kalita) submitted its
‘Promotion of Medical Device Industry’.51 Key report on the ‘Review of National Ayush Mission’.52
observations and recommendations of the Committee The National Ayush Mission was launched in 2014 to
are as follows: promote accessibility to ayurveda, yoga, unani, sidhha,
and homeopathy (Ayush). The Mission focuses on
▪ Impediments to growth of medical device
promoting and improving research, education, quality
industry: Domestic manufacturing of medical
of drugs, and infrastructure related to Ayush. Key
devices is currently limited to low-end to
observations and recommendations of the Committee
moderate-end medical devices such as
are as follows:
consumables, disposables, and implants. 70% of
high-end devices such as electronic equipment, ▪ Implementation of the Mission: The Committee
advance surgical instruments, and diagnostic noted that about 69% of integrated Ayush
products are imported. Issues that impede growth Hospitals approved under the Mission are still
of the sector include: (i) low investment in research under construction. Moreover, only 65% of Ayush
and development, (ii) fewer tax concessions and Health and Wellness centres have been established.
inverted duty structure (higher tax on raw material The Committee recommended extending the
than on the finished good) for domestic Mission by five years beyond 2024-25. It also
manufacturers, (iii) low capital investment, (iv) recommended that Sowa-Rigpa, a traditional
lack of skilled manpower, (v) limited price and system of medicine prevalent in the Himalayan
quality regulation, and (vi) fewer trained regions, should be included in the Mission.
healthcare professionals. The Committee noted
▪ Reasons for delays: Delays in the implementation
that initiatives taken by the Pharmaceuticals
of the Mission are primarily being caused due to:
Department since 2015 are yet to materialise. This
(i) late allocation of funds, (ii) overlapping
includes incentives such as interest subsidy,
functions between administrative entities, and (iii)
concessional power, and price controls for devices
delays in submitting utilisation certificates. In
like surgical instruments.
order to address these challenges, the Committee
▪ Import dependence: The domestic medical recommended reducing the number of budget line
devices sector is expected to be worth USD 50 items in state action plans and clearly
billion by 2030. However, currently 80% of our differentiating roles between different entities.
domestic sales constitute imported medical The Committee also recommended: (i) training
devices. Import of high-end devices has risen existing staff in managing projects effectively, (ii)
between 2019-20 and 2022-23, despite production creating specific action plans for Ayush Health and
linked incentives being in place. The Committee Wellness Centres, (iii) financial incentives to states
recommended formulating an inter-ministerial and for better implementation, and (iv) streamlining
inter-governmental strategy to offer domestic administrative processes through technology.
manufacturers competitive advantage.
For a PRS summary of the report, see here.
▪ Medical devices parks: Under the Promotion of
Medical Devices Parks Scheme, four medical
device parks are to be established in four states.
These parks will have common testing facilities Energy
and labs. Of the Rs 120 crore allocated in the first
phase (2022-23), only Rs 89 lakh has been spent so Cabinet approves a scheme to provide for
far. The Committee suggested that there needs to rooftop solar in one crore households
be regular progress monitoring with state agencies.
Arpita Mallick (arpita@prsindia.org)
It also recommended expanding the scheme to
other states.
The Union Cabinet approved the PM-Surya Ghar: Muft
For a PRS summary of the report, see here. Bijli Yojana.53 The scheme aims to provide for
installation of rooftop solar systems in one crore
households. The scheme will provide financial
assistance worth 60% of the system cost for
installations up to 2-kilowatt (kW) capacity. In
addition, 40% of additional system cost will be
provided for capacity between 2 kW and 3 kW. For
installing rooftop solar systems up to 3 kW capacity,
- 13-
Monthly Policy Review – February 2024 PRS Legislative Research
households will also be eligible for collateral-free loans fewer as may be specified by the State
at interest rate of around 7%. The total outlay under Commission. The amended Rules remove the
the scheme is estimated to be Rs 75,021 crore. discretion of the State Commission. Hence, the
complaints must be addressed within 30 days. The
Table 3: Estimated financial assistance under the
amended Rules also add that in case of a complaint
scheme (in rupees)
regarding the meter reading varying from actual
Installed Capacity Financial Assistance
electricity consumption, an additional meter must
▪ 1 kW 30,000 be installed within five days. The additional meter
must be installed for at least three months.
▪ 2 kW 60,000
▪ 3 kW or higher 78,000
Draft Regulations to determine tariff for
Source: Press Information Bureau; PRS.
renewable energy released
A 3 kW rooftop solar system is expected to generate
Tanvi Vipra (tanvi@prsindia.org)
more than 300 units per month on an average for a
household. The households will be allowed to sell
The Central Electricity Regulation Commission
surplus power to distribution companies in their area.
released draft regulations to determine tariff of power
from renewable energy (RE) sources.56 The
Amendment to Electricity (Rights of
Regulations will come in force on April 1, 2024 (unless
Consumers) Rules, 2020 notified
reviewed or extended), and will be remain in force until
Pratinav Damani (pratinav@prsindia.org) March 31, 2027. Key features include:
▪ Tariff types: There will be a generic tariff for RE
The Ministry of Power notified the Electricity (Rights
projects such as small hydro, non-fossil fuels-
of Consumers) Amendment Rules, 2024.54 The Rules
based co-generation, biogas based, and municipal
amend the Electricity (Rights of Consumers) Rules,
solid waste-based power projects. The generic
2020, which specify the rights and obligations of
tariff will be determined by CERC annually.
electricity consumers.55 Key features of the amended
CERC will determine a project specific tariff for
rules include:
projects such as solar PV, floating solar projects
▪ Choice to opt for a single connection for a and wind power projects.
building: The amended Rules add that owners
▪ Tariff structure: For projects that have a fuel cost
residing in apartments/flats/colonies may choose
component, a two-component tariff with a fixed
between individual connections for each owner or
cost and a fuel cost will be determined.
a single connection for the entire premises. If
more than 50% owners opt for an individual ▪ Over-generation: In case an RE project generates
connection, then all owners will be provided with more energy than the plant load factor, the project
an individual connection. may sell the excess energy to any entity. The
beneficiary shall have the first right of refusal. In
▪ In case of a single connection for a building or
case the beneficiary purchases the excess energy,
society, the Resident Welfare Association will be
the tariff will be equal to the tariff applicable for
responsible for metering, billing, and collection
that year.
from individual owners. The Resident Welfare
Association must operate on a no-profit, no-loss
basis. Discoms may provide a separate connection
for charging electric vehicles. Consumer Affairs
▪ Rooftop solar systems: Earlier, the Rules
Tanvi Vipra (tanvi@prsindia.org)
required that a technical feasibility study must be
conducted within 21 days or fewer as may be
Draft greenwashing guidelines released for
specified by the State Commission. The amended
public comments
Rules instead mandate that the study must be
completed within 15 days. Amended Rules also
The Central Consumer Protection Authority issued
add that failure to intimate the results to the
Draft Guidelines for Prevention and Regulation of
applicant will deem the project feasible. Solar
Greenwashing under the Consumer Protection Act,
systems up to 10 kW capacity will be exempted 2019.57 Greenwashing refers to the use of misleading
from a technical feasibility study. For such solar
words or imagery that emphasise positive
systems (below 10 kW), the entire cost of
environmental aspects while downplaying or
upgradation of distribution infrastructure is to be
concealing harmful attributes. Key features of the draft
borne by the discom.
Guidelines include:
▪ Protocol for meter related complaints: The
▪ Greenwashing to be prohibited: The Guidelines
2020 Rules provided that discoms must test a
prohibit engaging in greenwashing for advertising
meter within 30 days of receiving a complaint, or
or communication. It will apply to all
- 14-
Monthly Policy Review – February 2024 PRS Legislative Research
advertisements, service providers, product sellers, ▪ Approving authority for content: The draft
advertisers, endorsers, or advertising agencies. Rules add that the approving authority for
However, the prohibition will not apply to certification will be different based on the type and
advertisements or communication that is general length of the content. For instance, long theatrical
(not specific to a product or service). releases (more than 72 minutes) will be approved
by the Chairperson of the Board, whereas the
▪ Substantiation of environmental claims:
dubbed version of the same will be approved by
Generic terms such as clean, green, eco-friendly,
the concerned Regional Officer. Currently, the
cruelty free, and carbon-neutral will not be used
Board has nine regional offices.62
without adequate qualifiers and substantiation,
while making any environmental claims. ▪ Representation of women in Board: The 1983
Technical terms should be explained in a Rules state that the central government may take
consumer-friendly language that clarifies its steps to ensure the representation of women in the
meaning or implications. Board and advisory panels. Advisory panels are
constituted at a regional level for the examination
▪ Disclosures: All environmental claims must be
of films. The draft Rules specify that one-third of
accurate and disclose all material information.
the members of the Board and advisory panels
Research data must not be cherry picked while
must be women. Also, women should preferably
making disclosures. It should be clarified whether
comprise half of the Board and advisory panels.
an environmental claim refers to a good (or part of
it), a manufacturing process, packaging, or service. ▪ Invitation of experts for certification: The draft
Claims comparing goods or services must be based Rules allow the Regional Officer to invite one or
on verifiable data, which is disclosed to more subject or language experts in the field of
consumers. Specific environmental claims such as film for the examination of a film. If the experts
carbon neutral, non-toxic, and renewable, should are not invited for the initial screening, the content
be supported by credible certification, scientific may be re-screened for the experts, without any
evidence, or third-party verification. cost to the applicant.
▪ Claims regarding the future: Aspirational or Comments are invited until March 1, 2024.
futuristic environmental claims may only be made
when clear and actionable plans have been Standing Committee submits report on
developed. These plans must detail how these
regulation of cable television in India
objectives will be achieved.
The Standing Committee on Communications and
Comments are invited until March 21, 2024.
Information Technology (Chair: Mr. Prataprao Jadhav)
presented its report on ‘Regulation of Cable Television
in India’.63 Key observations and recommendations of
the Committee include:
Information and Broadcasting
▪ Regulation of cable television: Cable TV is
Pratinav Damani (pratinav@prsindia.org) primarily regulated by the Cable Television
Networks (Regulation) Act, 1995. However, there
Comments invited on the Draft Cinematograph are multiple regulators which have issued their
Certification Rules own rules and guidelines on various aspects. This
has led to a disparity of content across platforms.
The Ministry of Information and Broadcasting invited
The Telecom Regulatory Authority of India, the
comments on the draft of the Cinematograph
Department of Telecommunications and the
(Certification) Rules, 2024.58 The draft Rules seek to
Ministry of Information and Broadcasting (MIB),
replace the Cinematograph (Certification) Rules,
all regulate different aspects of cable television.
1983.59 The Rules have been framed under the
Cinematograph Act, 1952.60 The Act provides for ▪ Services such as Over The Top (OTT) platforms
certification of films and matters related to the Central are not regulated under this Act, but by Rules
Board of Film Certification. Draft Rules retain most of issued by the Ministry of Electronics and
the provisions under 1983 Rules. Key changes include: Information Technology. The Committee
observed that the cable TV industry needs to be
▪ UA certification: The Cinematograph
regulated by a comprehensive Act. The MIB
(Amendment) Act, 2023 introduced markers
informed the Committee that a draft Broadcasting
indicating age appropriateness for UA
Services (Regulation) Bill, 2023 had been released
certification.61 These are: (i) UA 7+, (ii) UA13+,
in the public domain for comments from
and (iii) UA 16+. These allow for unrestricted
stakeholders. The draft Bill seeks to regulate cable
public exhibition, subject to guidance of parents,
television and OTT platforms.
for children below the specified age threshold.
The draft Rules seek to give effect to these changes
in the Act.
- 15-
Monthly Policy Review – February 2024 PRS Legislative Research
▪ Constraints and challenges faced by the timelines and milestones for such projects, as well
Ministry: Challenges faced by the MIB include: as activities undertaken during the year.
(i) under-reporting of subscribers by cable
Comments are invited until March 23, 2024.
operators, (ii) absence of an oversight mechanism
at the ground level, and (iii) the absence of a
central database of Local Cable Operators (LCO).
LCOs currently have to register with the head post
Transport
office of their area. The Committee recommended
the MIB to work with the Ministry of Electronics
Tanvi Vipra (tanvi@prsindia.org)
and Information Technology to develop a
comprehensive digital solution to address under- Comments invited on Rules regarding LPG
reporting of cable TV subscribers and the absence
fitting in vehicles
of an oversight mechanism. It also recommended
that the MIB to take initiatives to be the registering The Ministry of Road Transport and Highways invited
authority for LCOs. comments on the Draft Central Motor Vehicles
(Amendment) Rules, 2024.67 The draft Rules amend
For a PRS Summary of the report, see here.
the Central Motor Vehicles Rules 1989, issued under
the Motor Vehicles Act, 1988.68,69 The Rules provide
mass emission standards for LPG driven vehicles. Key
features of the draft Rules are as follows:
Mines
▪ Eligibility of vehicles for fitting LPG kits:
Pratinav Damani (pratinav@prsindia.org) Under the 1989 Rules, certified LPG kits can be
installed in vehicles with a specified engine
Comments invited on draft Rules on Offshore capacity. This includes an engine capacity up to
Areas Mineral Trust 1,500 cc (with a 7% variation), and an engine
capacity greater than 1,500 cc (with a 5%
The Ministry of Mines has invited comments on the
variation). The Draft Rules extend this to include
draft Offshore Areas Mineral Trust Rules, 2024.64 The
vehicles whose engine capacity ranges from less
Rules have been issued under the Offshore Areas
than 1200 cc to more than 2,501 cc. It also adds
Mineral (Development and Regulation) Act, 2002.65
that mass emission and CO emission tests be
The Act regulates mining in the maritime zones of 2
carried out before fitting the LPG kits.
India. The Act was amended in 2023, to provide for
constitution of the Offshore Areas Mineral Trust.66 ▪ Validity of approval extended: Under the 1989
Key functions of the Trust are: (i) promoting research Rules, vehicles fitted with LPG kits are approved
on offshore areas and mitigation of any adverse for three years. The approval can be renewed
impacts, (ii) providing relief on the occurrence of a every three years. The Draft Rules propose to
natural disaster in the offshore area, and (iii) funding extend the approval and renewal period to six
institutions, startups and MSMEs for special projects years. The Draft Rules also list certain tests
related to offshore mining of minerals. The draft Rules required before renewing an LPG certificate.
provide for the matters related to the Trust. Key
Comments are invited until March 22, 2024.
features of the draft Rules include:
▪ Governance of the Trust: The Trust will be Standing Committee submits report on
governed by a Governing Body. An Executive operation and maintenance of national
Committee will be responsible for administration,
highways
management, and supervision of the trust. The
central government will notify the composition of The Standing Committee on Transport, Tourism and
both the bodies. Culture (Chair: Mr. V. Vijayasai Reddy) presented its
report on ‘Operation and Maintenance of National
▪ Fund under the Trust: An Offshore Areas
Highways and Management of Toll Plazas’. Key
Mineral Trust Fund will be set up and will be
recommendations of the Committee include:
managed by the Executive Committee. The fund
will be non-lapsable and non-interest-bearing. ▪ Delay in construction and inadequate funds for
Holders of a production lease for offshore mines maintenance: National Highway network
must pay a sum equal to 10% of the royalty increased by 54,858 km between 2014 and 2023.
payable to the central government to this Fund. The Committee observed that the completion of
hundreds of highways is running behind schedule,
▪ Annual plan: An annual plan must be tabled
and recommended expediting the construction
before the Governing Body by the Secretary of the
process. In 2023-24, the Ministry was allocated Rs
Executive Committee every financial year. The
2,600 crore for maintaining highways, which was
plan must contain details of projects proposed to
1% of the Ministry’s total budget. The Committee
be undertaken during the year. It must also contain
noted that given the vast length of highways, this
- 16-
Monthly Policy Review – February 2024 PRS Legislative Research
amount is miniscule. It noted that several The Committee recommended that the
committees including the NITI Aayog have infrastructure status as given to shipyards should
suggested prioritising the maintenance of existing be extended to all ships and vessels. It also
roads over constructing new national highways. recommended: (i) incentivising domestic
production of specialised steels and (ii)
▪ Slow progress in monetisation: The Ministry
establishing a Maritime Development Fund for
targets to raise Rs 45,000 crore under the toll-
access to working capital and long-term finance.
operate-transfer (TOT) (Rs 30,000 crore) and
Infrastructure Investment Trusts (Rs 15,000 crore) For a summary of the report, please see here.
(InvIT) models. The Committee noted that in the
past two years, only 15% of the targets have been
met. It recommended that the pace of monetisation
should be increased to cope with NHAI’s rising Housing and Urban Affairs
debt. In the current model, risks of traffic and toll
collection are passed on to the private Arpita Mallick (arpita@prsindia.org)
concessionaire which has resulted in dwindling
Standing Committee submits report on Smart
interest. The Committee noted that hybrid
structures where the traffic risk is shared by the Cities
authorities and the assured minimum payments are
The Standing Committee on Housing and Urban
made to concessionaires could alleviate some of
Affairs (Chair: Mr Rajiv Ranjan) submitted its report
the existing challenges.
on “Smart Cities Mission: An Evaluation”.71 The
For a PRS Summary of the report, see here Smart Cities Mission (SCM) was launched in 2015 to
provide infrastructure, and a clean and sustainable
Standing Committee submits report on status environment to citizens. Observations and
of ship building industries recommendations of the Committee include:
▪ Special Purpose Vehicles (SPVs): The Smart
Arpita Mallick (arpita@prsindia.org)
Cities mission is implemented by SPVs which are
The Standing Committee on Transport, Tourism and equally owned by Urban Local Bodies (ULBs) and
Culture (Chair: Mr V. Vijayasai Reddy) submitted its states. The board of directors of SPVs include
report on ‘Status of Ship Building, Ship Repair and central and state government representatives and
Ship breaking industries in the Country’70 Key chief executive officers (CEOs). The Committee
recommendations include: noted that the frequent transfer of CEOs and lack
of clear guidelines is one of the major challenges
▪ Financial Assistance Policy: Under an initial faced by SPVs. It recommended: (i) appointing
financial assistance policy shipbuilders were dedicated CEOs with a minimum fixed tenure, (ii)
provided 30% additional assistance on building ensuring representation of experts and concerned
merchant vessels longer than 80 meters for the stakeholders in SPVs, and (iii) utilising an SPV’s
domestic market. For export orders, ships of all existing expertise in future projects.
types and capacities were eligible for the subsidy.
A new financial assistance scheme was introduced ▪ Public Private Partnerships: 21% of the smart
for both state-owned and private shipyards, cities’ total funding was targeted to be raised via
extending support for ships regardless of size. public-private partnerships (PPP). However, the
Under this policy, financial assistance equivalent Committee noted that among the projects
to 20% of the contract price, fair price or actual sanctioned, only 6% of the funding is through PPP.
payments received, whichever is the least, will be Half of the smart cities could not take any project
offered. The Committee noted that only 6-7% of under the PPP model. The Committee
the Rs 4,000 crore corpus created for the policy has recommended that the government should analyse
been utilised. It recommended evaluating reasons the reasons behind low private investments and
for poor scheme utilization, and whether factors take remedial steps towards the same.
such as high material imports for shipbuilding and
▪ Digital infrastructure protection: There are
low automation are affecting the competitiveness
various digital infrastructure platforms under SCM
of Indian shipyards.
which generate and use large volumes of data. The
▪ Development of shipbuilding industry: The Committee recommended formulating a
share of India in global shipbuilding industry is mechanism to protect digital infrastructure from
around 1%-2% due to high cost of shipbuilding. cyber threats and maintain data privacy. It also
The Rangarajan Commission had recommended highlighted the need for the maintenance of digital
classification of ships and other vessels as and physical assets. It recommended building
infrastructure. Currently, shipyards have been comprehensive operation and maintenance
granted the infrastructure status which would strategies to increase lifetime utility and ensure
provide access to long term funding at lower rates. timely upgradation of assets under the mission.
- 17-
Monthly Policy Review – February 2024 PRS Legislative Research
For a PRS summary of the report, see here. Labour
Tanvi Vipra (tanvi@prsindia.org)
Rural Development Medical insurance approved for certain retired
persons
Arpita Mallick (arpita@prsindia.org)
The Employees’ State Insurance Corporation (ESIC)
Standing Committee submits report on approved the decision to extend medical benefits to
functioning of MGNREGA certain retired persons. Currently, only those persons
whose wages are below Rs 30,000 per month, are
The Standing Committee on Rural Development and covered. Benefits will also be extend to those persons
Panchayati Raj (Chair: Ms. Kanimozhi Karunanidhi) whose wages are above this threshold.73 To be eligible,
submitted its report on “Rural Employment through the worker must have been under insurable
Mahatma Gandhi National Rural Employment employment for at least five years before their
Guarantee Act (MGNREGA) - An Insight into Wage superannuation or voluntary retirement.
Rates and Other Matters relating thereto”.72 Key
recommendations of the Committee include:
▪ Revision of wage rates: Wage rates under
Water Resources
MGNREGA are notified using Consumer Price
Index for Agricultural Labour with 2010-11 as the
Arpita Mallick (arpita@prsindia.org)
base year. These rates are revised every year. The
Committee noted that using 2010-11 as the base
Standing Committee submits report on review
year is not coherent with the present inflation and
of Yamuna River cleaning projects in Delhi
cost of living. Wages in Madhya Pradesh and
Chhattisgarh are Rs 221, and Rs 228 in Bihar and The Standing Committee on Water Resources (Chair:
Jharkhand. A central government Committee on Mr Parbatbhai Savabhai Patel) submitted its report on
minimum wages had recommended the wages “Review of Upper Yamuna River Cleaning Projects up
under MGNREGA to be Rs 375 a day. to Delhi and Riverbed Management in Delhi”.74 Key
Accordingly, the Committee recommended recommendations of the Committee include:
revising the wage rates.
▪ Groundwater extraction: The Committee noted
▪ Delay in payments: According to MGNREGA, that water yielded from production wells in
payment of wages should be done within fifteen Yamuna is supplied for irrigation, domestic and
days of closure of muster rolls. The Committee industrial purposes. The Delhi Jal Board has
observed delay in release of wages and material installed 130 production wells in Yamuna
components. They recommended DoRD to (i) floodplains which yield 196 Megalitres per day
streamline the payment process, and (ii) use (MLD) water. There is still scope for withdrawal
physical pay slips for technologically backward of additional 190 MLD of water. This demand
beneficiaries of the scheme. increases during non-monsoon seasons and
pumping of groundwater by borewells leads to
▪ Gaps in budgetary allocation: The Committee
drying of the river course. The Committee
noted that the budgetary allocation to MGNREGA
recommended that the agricultural sector adopt
Scheme was Rs 60,000 crore against the proposed
micro and drip irrigation techniques, and practice
demand of Rs 98,000 crore in 2023-24. In 2022-
water budgeting and watershed management.
23, the revised estimate for the scheme was Rs
89,400 crore. The Committee noted that reduced ▪ Water Quality: The Committee noted that
budgeted allocation can negatively affect timely between 2021 and 2023, out of 33 monitored
release of wages and materials. It recommended locations, the water quality in 23 locations did not
the Department of Rural Development (DoRD) to comply with the Primary Water Quality Criteria
seek funding in line with previous years’ for Outdoor Bathing (PWQC). The level of
expenditures. dissolved oxygen, which is prescribed to be greater
than 5 mg/l for life sustenance, was found to be
For a PRS summary of the report, see here.
virtually non-existent in Delhi.
▪ Riverbed Pollution: The Committee observed a
rise in cases of debris dumping in Yamuna from
one in 2018 to 610 in 2021. High levels of metals
such as lead, copper and zinc were found in
various sludge samples collected from Yamuna
which is a severe health hazard. The Committee
recommended that: (i) the Department prepare
- 18-
Monthly Policy Review – February 2024 PRS Legislative Research
rules regarding dumping of debris, (ii) controlled For a summary of the report, please see here.
dredging be explored to remove debris and heavy
metals from the bottom of the riverbed, and (iii) a
system for proper disposal of heavy metal polluted
sludge be framed.
1 Interim Union Budget 2024-25, https://www.indiabudget.gov.in/. https://prsindia.org/files/bills_acts/bills_parliament/2024/Constitution
_(Scheduled_Tribes)_Order_(Amendment)_Bill,_2024.pdf
2 Press Note on Second Advance Estimates of National Income 2023-
24, Quarterly Estimates of Gross Domestic Product for the Third 16 ‘The Law on Criminal Defamation’, Law Commission of India,
Quarter (October-December) of 2023-24 and First Revised Estimates January 31, 2024,
of National Income, Consumption Expenditure, Saving and Capital https://cdnbbsr.s3waas.gov.in/s3ca0daec69b5adc880fb464895726dbd
Formation for 2022-23, National Statistical Office, Ministry of f/uploads/2024/02/202402021139959703.pdf.
Statistics and Programme Implementation, February 29, 2024, 17 A Comprehensive Review of the Epidemic Diseases Act, 1897’,
https://www.mospi.gov.in/sites/default/files/press_release/PressNote Law Commission of India, February 7, 2024,
GDP29022024.pdf. https://cdnbbsr.s3waas.gov.in/s3ca0daec69b5adc880fb464895726dbd
3 Press Note on Second Advance Estimates of National Income 2023- f/uploads/2024/02/20240212724768593.pdf.
24, Quarterly Estimates of Gross Domestic Product for the Third 18 ‘Law on Matrimonial Issues relating to Non-resident Indians and
Quarter (October-December) of 2023-24 and First Revised Estimates Overseas citizens of India’, Law Commission of India, February 15,
of National Income, Consumption Expenditure, Saving and Capital 2024,
Formation for 2022-23, National Statistical Office, Ministry of https://cdnbbsr.s3waas.gov.in/s3ca0daec69b5adc880fb464895726dbd
Statistics and Programme Implementation, February 29, 2024, f/uploads/2024/02/20240216739162193.pdf.
https://www.mospi.gov.in/sites/default/files/press_release/PressNote 19 Report no. 141, ‘Judicial Infrastructure in the North Eastern States
GDP29022024.pdf. of India’, Standing Committee on Personnel, Grievances, Law and
4 Press Note on First Advance Estimates of National Income 2023- Justice, February 7, 2024,
24, National Statistical Office, Ministry of Statistics and Programme https://sansad.in/getFile/rsnew/Committee_site/Committee_File/Repo
Implementation, January 5, 2024, rtFile/18/191/141_2024_2_12.pdf?source=rajyasabha
https://www.mospi.gov.in/sites/default/files/press_release/PressNote 20 Report no. 142, ‘Strengthening Legal Education in View of
FAE2023-24N.pdf. Emerging Challenges before the Legal Profession’, Standing
5 Notification, Central Statistical Office, Ministry of Statistics and Committee on Personnel, Public Grievances, Law and Justice,
Programme Implementation, February 28, 2024, February 7, 2024,
https://www.mospi.gov.in/sites/default/files/announcements/Notificat https://sansad.in/getFile/rsnew/Committee_site/Committee_File/Repo
ion_English_Signed.pdf?download=1. rtFile/18/191/142_2024_2_12.pdf?source=rajyasabha
6 Monetary Policy Statement, 2023-24, Resolution of the Monetary 21 Water (Prevention and Control of Pollution) Amendment Bill,
Policy Committee (MPC) February 6 to 8, 2024, Reserve Bank of 2024,
India, February 8, 2024, https://prsindia.org/files/bills_acts/bills_parliament/2024/Water_(Pre
https://rbidocs.rbi.org.in/rdocs/PressRelease/PDFs/PR1826MPCRES vention_and_Control_of_Pollution)_Bill,_2024.pdf.
OLUTIONFEBRUARY2024632329A8D39644F28C5EA782119B99 22 Water (Prevention and Control of Pollution) Act, 1974,
C3.PDF. https://www.indiacode.nic.in/bitstream/123456789/15429/1/the_wate
7 Monetary Policy Statement, 2022-23 Resolution of the Monetary r_%28prevention_and_control_of_pollution%29_act%2C_1974.pdf.
Policy Committee (MPC) February 6-8, 2023, Reserve Bank of India, 23 The Public Examinations (Prevention of Unfair Means) Act,
February 8, 2023, 2024,https://prsindia.org/files/bills_acts/bills_parliament/2024/The_P
https://rbidocs.rbi.org.in/rdocs/PressRelease/PDFs/PR1680701A840E ublic_Examinations_(Prevention_of_Unfair_Means)_Act,_2024.pdf
83084999813D1AA1F86CA151.PDF.
24 ‘Guidelines for Internship/Research Internship for Undergraduate
8 Quick Estimates of Index of Industrial Production and Use-Based Students’, University Grants Commission, February 2, 2024,
Index for The Month of December 2023, Ministry of Statistics and https://www.ugc.gov.in/pdfnews/2051511_Internship-Research-
Programme Implementation, February 12, 2024, Internship-Guidelines.pdf
https://www.mospi.gov.in/sites/default/files/press_release/IIP_PR_12
25 Draft Guidelines for Prevention of Misleading Advertisements in
feb24.pdf.
Coaching, 2024, Central Consumer Protection Authority, February
9 “Quick Estimates of Index of Industrial Production and Use-Based 16, 2024, https://consumeraffairs.nic.in/sites/default/files/file-
Index for the Month of December, 2022 (Base 2011-12=100), Press uploads/latestnews/Public%20Comments%20Letter%202.pdf.
Information Bureau, Ministry of Statistics and Programme
26 The Consumer Protection Act, 2019,
Implementation, February 10, 2023,
https://www.indiacode.nic.in/bitstream/123456789/15256/1/a2019-
https://pib.gov.in/PressReleasePage.aspx?PRID=1897995.
35.pdf.
10 Writ Petition No. 880 of 2017, Association of Democratic Reforms
27 “Cabinet approves amendment in the Foreign Direct Investment
& Anr, vs. Union of India, Supreme Court,
(FDI) policy on Space Sector”, Press Information Bureau, Ministry of
https://main.sci.gov.in/supremecourt/2017/27935/27935_2017_1_150
Commerce and Industry, February 21, 2024,
1_50573_Judgement_15-Feb-2024.pdf
https://pib.gov.in/PressReleasePage.aspx?PRID=2007876.
11 The Finance Act, 2017,
28 Consolidated FDI Policy, Ministry of Commerce and Industry,
https://egazette.gov.in/WriteReadData/2017/175141.pdf
https://dpiit.gov.in/sites/default/files/FDI-PolicyCircular-2020-
12 S.O. 29 (E), Gazette of India, Ministry of Finance, January 2, 2018, 29October2020_0.pdf.
http://egazette.nic.in/WriteReadData/2018/181434.pdf.
29 187th Report, ‘Comprehensive Strategy to Map Major Products and
13 Jammu and Kashmir Local Bodies Laws (Amendment) Act, 2024, Countries to Maximise Exports and Minimise Imports’, Standing
https://prsindia.org/files/bills_acts/bills_parliament/2024/The_Jammu Committee on Commerce, February 8, 2024,
_and_Kashmir_Local_Bodies_Laws_(Amendment)_Act,_2024.pdf https://sansad.in/getFile/rsnew/Committee_site/Committee_File/Repo
14 The Constitution (Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes) Order rtFile/13/186/187_2024_2_13.pdf?source=rajyasabha.
(Amendment) Bill, 2024, 30 Exposure Draft of Insurance Regulatory and Development
https://prsindia.org/files/bills_acts/bills_parliament/2024/Constitution Authority of India (Protection of Policyholders’ Interests and Allied
_(Scheduled_Castes_and_Scheduled_Tribes)_Orders_(Amendment)_ Matters of Insurers) Regulations, 2024, Insurance Regulatory and
Bill,_2024.pdf Development Authority of India, February 14, 2024,
15 The Constitution (Scheduled Tribes) Order (Amendment Bill, https://irdai.gov.in/web/guest/document-
2024, detail?documentId=4416546.
- 19-
Monthly Policy Review – February 2024 PRS Legislative Research
nformation%20Technology/17_Communications_and_Information_
Technology_54.pdf?source=loksabhadocs.
31 Insurance Regulatory and Development Authority of India
(Protection of Policyholders’ Interests) Regulations, 2017, Insurance 45 Surrogacy (Regulation) Amendment Rules, 2024, Ministry of
Regulatory and Development Authority of India, June 22, 2017, Health and Family Welfare, February 21, 2024,
https://irdai.gov.in/document-detail?documentId=385593. https://egazette.gov.in/WriteReadData/2024/252270.pdf.
32 “Consultation Paper on Relaxation in Timelines for Disclosure of 46 G.S.R 460(E), Ministry of Health and Family Welfare, June 21,
Material Changes by Foreign Portfolio Investors”, Securities and 2022,
Exchange Board of India, February 7, 2024, https://upload.indiacode.nic.in/showfile?actid=AC_CEN_12_72_000
https://www.sebi.gov.in/reports-and-statistics/reports/feb- 02_202147_1643711958603&type=rule&filename=surrogacy_rules.
2024/consultation-paper-on-relaxation-in-timelines-for-disclosure-of- pdf.
material-changes-by-foreign-portfolio-investors_81211.html. 47 The Surrogacy (Regulation) Act, 2021,
33 Consultation Paper on Ease of Doing Business Initiatives for https://www.indiacode.nic.in/bitstream/123456789/17046/1/A2021-
Mutual Funds, Securities and Exchange Board of India, February 23, 47.pdf.
2024, https://www.sebi.gov.in/reports-and-statistics/reports/feb- 48 G.S.R.179(E)., Ministry of Health and Family Welfare, March 14,
2024/consultation-paper-on-ease-of-doing-business-initiatives-for- 2023,
mutual-funds_81722.html. https://upload.indiacode.nic.in/showfile?actid=AC_CEN_12_72_000
34 Draft Disclosure framework on Climate-related Financial Risks, 02_202147_1643711958603&type=rule&filename=the_surrogacy_a
2024, Reserve Bank of India, February 28, 2024, mendment_rule,_2023.pdf
https://rbidocs.rbi.org.in/rdocs/Content/PDFs/DRAFTDISCLOSURE 49 Writ Petition (Civil) no. 830/2023, ABC vs. Union of India,
CLIMATERELATEDFINANCIALRISKS20249FBE3A566E7F487 Supreme Court, October 18, 2023,
EBF9974642E6CCDB1.PDF. https://main.sci.gov.in/supremecourt/2022/26590/26590_2022_15_50
35 RBI invites comments on the “Draft Disclosure framework on _47762_Order_18-Oct-2023.pdf .
Climate-related Financial Risks, 2024”, Reserve Bank of India, 50 Report No. 157, 'Quality of Medical Education in India', Standing
February 28, 2024, Committee on Health and Family Welfare, Rajya Sabha, February 9,
https://rbidocs.rbi.org.in/rdocs/PressRelease/PDFs/PR1958DRAFTC 2024,
LIMATERELATEDFINANCIALRISKS20249B1140EC054244DB8 https://sansad.in/getFile/rsnew/Committee_site/Committee_File/Repo
BD2D5655BB39988.PDF. rtFile/14/187/157_2024_2_19.pdf?source=rajyasabha
36 Report No. 66, ‘Performance Review and Regulation of Insurance 51 Report No. 50, ‘Promotion of Medical Device Industry’, Standing
Sector’, Standing Committee on Finance, February 6, 2024, Committee on Chemicals and Fertilizers, Lok Sabha, February 8,
https://sansad.in/getFile/lsscommittee/Finance/17_Finance_66.pdf?so 2024,
urce=loksabhadocs. https://sansad.in/getFile/lsscommittee/Chemicals%20&%20Fertilizer
37 “Cabinet approves "Pradhan Mantri Matsya Kisan Samridhi Sah- s/17_Chemicals_And_Fertilizers_50.pdf?source=loksabhadocs.
Yojana (PM-MKSSY)”, Ministry of Agriculture and Farmers’ 52 Report No. 156, 'Review of National AYUSH Mission', Standing
Welfare, Press Information Bureau, February 8, 2024, Committee on Health and Family Welfare, Rajya Sabha, February 7,
https://www.pib.gov.in/PressReleasePage.aspx?PRID=2004216. 2024,
38 Report No. 70, ‘Employment and Revenue Earning Potential of https://sansad.in/getFile/rsnew/Committee_site/Committee_File/Repo
Fisheries Sector’, Standing Committee on Agriculture, Animal rtFile/14/187/156_2024_2_19.pdf?source=rajyasabha
Husbandry, and Food Processing, Lok Sabha, February 7, 2024, 53 “Cabinet approves PM-Surya Ghar: Muft Bijli Yojana for installing
https://sansad.in/getFile/lsscommittee/Agriculture,%20Animal%20H rooftop solar in one crore households”, Press Information Bureau,
usbandry%20and%20Food%20Processing/17_Agriculture_Animal_ Cabinet, February 29, 2024,
Husbandry_and_Food_Processing_70.pdf?source=loksabhadocs. https://pib.gov.in/PressReleseDetailm.aspx?PRID=2010130.
39 Report No. 68, ‘Promotion of Climate Resilient Farming’, Standing 54 The Electricity (Rights of Consumers) Amendment Rules, 2024,
Committee on Agriculture, Animal Husbandry, and Food Processing, Ministry of Power, February 22, 2024,
Lok Sabha, February 7, 2024, https://powermin.gov.in/sites/default/files/webform/notices/Electricit
https://sansad.in/getFile/lsscommittee/Agriculture,%20Animal%20H y_Rights_of_Consumers_Amendment_Rules_2024.pdf.
usbandry%20and%20Food%20Processing/17_Agriculture_Animal_ 55 The Electricity (Rights of Consumers) Rules, 2020, Ministry of
Husbandry_and_Food_Processing_68.pdf?source=loksabhadocs. Power, December 31, 2020,
40 Report No. 55, ‘Development of Cotton Sector’, Standing https://powermin.gov.in/sites/default/files/uploads/Consumers_Rules
Committee on Labour, Textiles and Skill Development, Lok Sabha, _2020.pdf.
February 7, 2024, 56 Draft Central Electricity Regulatory Commission (Terms and
https://sansad.in/getFile/lsscommittee/Labour,%20Textiles%20and% Conditions for Tariff determination from Renewable Energy Sources)
20Skill%20Development/17_Labour_Textiles_and_Skill_Developme Regulations, 2024, Central Electricity Regulatory Commission,
nt_55.pdf?source=loksabhadocs. https://cercind.gov.in/2024/draft_reg/DN170224.pdf.
41 Information Technology (Procedure and Safeguards for 57 Draft Guidelines for Prevention and Regulation of Greenwashing,
Interception, Monitoring and Decryption of Information) Amendment 2024, Central Consumer Protection Authority, February 20, 2024,
Rules, 2024, Ministry of Electronics and Information Technology, https://consumeraffairs.nic.in/sites/default/files/file-
February 26, 2024, uploads/latestnews/Draft%20Guidline%20with%20approval.pdf.
https://egazette.gov.in/WriteReadData/2024/252374.pdf. 58 Draft Cinematograph (Certification) Rules, 2024, Ministry of
42 Information Technology (Procedure and Safeguards for Information and Broadcasting, February 9, 2024,
Interception, Monitoring and Decryption of Information) Rules, https://mib.gov.in/sites/default/files/Ministry%20of%20Information
2009, Ministry of Electronics and Information Technology, October %20and%20Broadcasting%20invites%20commentssuggestions%20o
27, 2009, n%20the%20Draft%20Cinematograph%20%28Certification%29%20
https://www.meity.gov.in/writereaddata/files/Information%20Techno Rules%2C%202024%20proposed%20to%20be%20notified%20to%2
logy%20%28Procedure%20and%20Safeguards%20for%20Intercepti 0carry%20out%20the%20provisions%20of%20the%20Cinematograp
on%2C%20Monitoring%20and%20Decryption%20of%20Informatio h%20%28Amendment%29%20Act%2C%202023.pdf.
n%29%20Rules%2C%202009.pdf. 59 The Cinematograph (Certification) Rules, 1983, Ministry of
43 The Information Technology Act, 2000, Information and Broadcasting, May 9, 1983,
https://www.indiacode.nic.in/bitstream/123456789/1999/1/A2000- https://upload.indiacode.nic.in/showfile?actid=AC_CEN_29_41_000
21%20%281%29.pdf. 11_195237_1517807328551&type=rule&filename=Cinematograph%
44 Report No. 54, ‘Digital Payment and Online Security Measures for 20Certification%20Rules%201983.pdf.
Data Protection’, Standing Committee on Communications and 60 The Cinematograph Act, 1952,
Information Technology, Lok Sabha, February 8, 2024, https://www.indiacode.nic.in/bitstream/123456789/2170/5/a1952-
https://sansad.in/getFile/lsscommittee/Communications%20and%20I 37.pdf.
- 20-
Monthly Policy Review – February 2024 PRS Legislative Research
71 Report no. 21, ‘Smart Cities Mission: An evaluation’, Standing
Committee on Housing and Urban Affairs,
61 The Cinematograph (Amendment) Act, 2023,
https://sansad.in/getFile/lsscommittee/Housing%20and%20Urban%2
https://egazette.gov.in/WriteReadData/2023/247867.pdf.
0Affairs/17_Housing_and_Urban_Affairs_21.pdf?source=loksabhad
62 Website of the Central Board of Film Certification as accessed on ocs.
March 1, 2024, https://www.cbfcindia.gov.in/cbfcAdmin/about.php.
72 Report no. 37, “Rural Employment through Mahatma Gandhi
63 Report No. 56, ‘Regulation of Cable Television in India’, Standing National Rural Employment Guarantee Act (MGNREGA)- An
Committee on Communications and Information Technology, Lok insight into wage rates and other matters relating thereto”, Standing
Sabha, February 8, 2024, Committee on Rural Development and Panchayati Raj,
https://sansad.in/getFile/lsscommittee/Communications%20and%20I https://sansad.in/getFile/lsscommittee/Rural%20Development%20an
nformation%20Technology/17_Communications_and_Information_ d%20Panchayati%20Raj/17_Rural_Development_and_Panchayati_R
Technology_56.pdf?source=loksabhadocs. aj_37.pdf?source=loksabhadocs.
64 Draft Offshore Areas Mineral Trust Rules, 2024, Ministry of 73 “Medical Benefits to be extended to superannuated Insured Persons
Mines, February 22, 2024, with relaxed norms”, Ministry of Labour and Employment, Press
https://mines.gov.in/admin/storage/app/uploads/65d80a8820ab01708 Information Bureau, February 10, 2024,
657288.pdf. https://www.pib.gov.in/PressReleasePage.aspx?PRID=2004774.
65 The Offshore Areas Mineral (Development and Regulation) Act, 74 Report no. 27, ‘Review of Upper Yamuna River Cleaning Projects
2002, up to Delhi and Riverbed Management in Delhi’, Standing
https://www.indiacode.nic.in/bitstream/123456789/2040/3/A2003- Committee on Water Resources, February 6, 2024,
17.pdf. https://sansad.in/getFile/lsscommittee/Water
66 The Offshore Areas Mineral (Development and Regulation) Resources/17_Water_Resources_27.pdf?source=loksabhadocs.
Amendment Act, 2023,
https://egazette.gov.in/WriteReadData/2023/248041.pdf.
DISCLAIMER: This document is being furnished to you for your
67 GSR 126(E), Draft Central Motor Vehicles Amendment Rules, information. You may choose to reproduce or redistribute this
2024, Ministry of Road Transport and Highways, February 22, 2024, report for non-commercial purposes in part or in full to any other
https://egazette.gov.in/(S(0mnp3mo5odh5fj0xugg4dqhf))/ViewPDF.a person with due acknowledgement of PRS Legislative Research
spx. (“PRS”). The opinions expressed herein are entirely those of the
68 The Central Motor Vehicles Rules, 1989, author(s). PRS makes every effort to use reliable and
https://upload.indiacode.nic.in/showfile?actid=AC_CG_61_1084_00 comprehensive information, but PRS does not represent that the
001_00001_1554966634246&type=rule&filename=the_central_moto contents of the report are accurate or complete. PRS is an
r_vehicles_rules,_1989.pdf#page=22&zoom=100,0,0. independent, not-for-profit group. This document has been
69 The Motor Vehicles Act, 1988, prepared without regard to the objectives or opinions of those
https://indiacode.nic.in/bitstream/123456789/1798/1/A1988-59.pdf. who may receive it.
70 Report no. 368, “Status of Ship Building, Ship Repair and Ship
breaking industries in the Country”, Standing Committee on
Transport, Tourism and Culture, February 8, 2024,
https://sansad.in/getFile/rsnew/Committee_site/Committee_File/Repo
rtFile/20/193/368_2024_2_14.pdf?source=rajyasabha.
- 21-
