Monthly Policy Review
August 2024
Highlights of this Issue
Budget Session 2024 concludes: 11 Bills introduced (p. 2)
The Budget Session of Parliament was held for 15 days. Eleven Bills were introduced. One Bill was referred to
a Joint Parliamentary Committee.
GDP grows at 6.7% in first quarter of 2024-25 (p. 2)
Construction sector registered the highest growth in the first quarter of 2024-25 (10.5%), followed by electricity
and other utility services (10.4%), and public services (9.5%).
Repo rate kept unchanged at 6.5% (p. 2)
The MPC also decided to retain the standing deposit facility rate and the marginal standing facility rate at 6.25%
and 6.75%, respectively.
Cabinet approves Unified Pension Scheme for government employees (p. 4)
The scheme guarantees pension to government employees at 50% of average basic pay drawn over last 12
months prior to superannuation.
Bill to amend law regulating waqf property introduced; referred to Committee (p. 5)
Bill specifies that only a person practicing Islam for at least five years can declare a waqf. It also revises the
composition of state waqf boards and the Central Waqf Council to provide for representation of non-Muslims.
Disaster Management (Amendment) Bill, 2024 introduced in Lok Sabha (p. 6)
The Disaster Management (Amendment) Bill, 2024 was introduced in Lok Sabha. The Bill gives states power
to constitute Urban Disaster Management Authorities and a State Disaster Response Force.
Supreme Court forms task force on safety measures for medical personnel (p. 7)
The task force will prepare an action-plan that recommends improvements in areas such as security,
infrastructure, and implementation of sexual harassment laws.
Bill to reserve seats for STs in Goa Assembly introduced in Lok Sabha (p. 6)
The Bill reserves seats for Scheduled Tribes (STs) in the Goa Assembly. This will be based on the estimated
population of STs according to the 2001 census.
Bill to amend banking laws introduced in Lok Sabha (p. 3)
The Bill amends the definition of fortnight on the basis of which banks are required to maintain cash reserves,
and increases the maximum term of directors of cooperative banks.
Cabinet approves several schemes and programmes
These include the PM Awas Yojana 2.0 – Urban/Gramin, development of new Industrial nodes/cities, Vigyan
Dhara Scheme, and the expansion of the Agriculture Infrastructure Fund.
Rules notified for Offshore Areas Mineral Trust and auction of offshore minerals (p. 11)
The Offshore Areas Mineral (Auction) Rules, 2024 specify the auction parameters for offshore area minerals.
The Offshore Areas Mineral Trust Rules, 2024 define contributions to the Offshore Areas Mineral Trust.
September 2, 2024
PRS Legislative Research ■ Institute for Policy Research Studies
3rd Floor, Gandharva Mahavidyalaya ■ 212, Deen Dayal Upadhyaya Marg ■ New Delhi – 110002
Tel: (011) 23234801, 43434035 ■ www.prsindia.org
Monthly Policy Review – August 2024 PRS Legislative Research
Parliament Figure 1: GDP growth at constant 2011-12 prices (in
%, year-on-year)
First Budget Session of 18th Lok Sabha 14% 12.8%
concludes; 11 Bills introduced 12%
Niranjana S Menon (niranjana@prsindia.org) 10% 8.2% 8.1% 8.6% 7.8%
8% 6.2% 6.7%
5.5%
The Budget Session of Parliament was held from July 6% 4.3%
22, 2024 to August 9, 2024. Parliament met for 15 4%
days, and adjourned one working day ahead of the 2%
planned schedule. 0%
Q1 Q2 Q3 Q4 Q1 Q2 Q3 Q4 Q1
Eleven Bills were introduced during this session.
These include the Waqf (Amendment) Bill, 2024, the 2022-23 2023-24 2024-
25
Bharatiya Vayuyan Vidheyak, 2024, the Disaster
Management (Amendment) Bill, 2024, and a Bill Sources: Ministry of Statistics and Programme Implementation;
which provides for the reservation of seats in the Goa PRS.
Assembly for Scheduled Tribes. GDP across economic sectors is measured in terms of
Gross Value Added (GVA). Construction sector
The Bharatiya Vayuyan Vidheyak, 2024 was passed by
registered the highest growth in the first quarter of
one House (Lok Sabha), and is pending before Rajya
2024-25 (10.5%), followed by electricity and other
Sabha. The Waqf (Amendment) Bill, 2024 has been
utility services (10.4%), and public services (9.5%).
referred to a Joint Parliamentary Committee for further
scrutiny. The Union Budget, and the Jammu and Table 1: Growth in GVA across sectors at constant
Kashmir Budget for 2024-25 were passed during this 2011-12 prices (in %, year-on-year)
session. The Finance Bill was passed with amendments.
Q1 Q1 Q1
The Bill had proposed removal of indexation on long- Sector
2022-23 2023-24 2024-25
term capital gains on real estate assets; while passing
Agriculture 2.7% 3.7% 2.0%
the Bill, this proposal was dropped.
Mining 6.6% 7.0% 7.2%
For more details on legislative business transacted
Manufacturing 2.2% 5.0% 7.0%
during the Budget Session 2024, please see here. For
Electricity 15.6% 3.2% 10.4%
details on the functioning of Parliament during the
session, please see here. Construction 14.7% 8.6% 10.5%
Trade 22.1% 9.7% 5.7%
Estimates Committee identifies subjects for
Financial services 10.5% 12.6% 7.1%
examination in 2024-25
Public services 23.6% 8.3% 9.5%
Financial Committees have been constituted for 2024- GVA 11.3% 8.3% 6.8%
25. The Committee on Welfare of Other Backward
GDP 12.8% 8.2% 6.7%
Classes, and the Committee on Welfare of Scheduled
Sources: Ministry of Statistics and Programme Implementation; PRS.
Castes and Scheduled Tribes have also been
constituted. Two of these Committees have identified
Repo rate kept unchanged at 6.5%
subjects for detailed examination for the year 2024-
25.12 The list of subjects can be found in the Annexure. The Monetary Policy Committee (MPC) of the Reserve
Bank of India (RBI) kept the policy repo rate (the rate
at which RBI lends money to banks) unchanged at
6.5%.4 Other decisions of the Committee include:
Macroeconomic Development
▪ The standing deposit facility rate (the rate at which
RBI borrows from banks without giving collateral)
Tushar Chakrabarty (tushar@prsindia.org)
has been retained at 6.25%.
GDP grows at 6.7% in first quarter of 2024-25 ▪ The marginal standing facility rate (the rate at
which banks can borrow additional money from
Gross Domestic Product (GDP) (at constant prices)
RBI) and the bank rate (rate at which RBI buys
grew at 6.7% in the first quarter (April-June) of 2024-
bills of exchange) have been retained at 6.75%.
25, over the corresponding period in 2023-24.3 In the
first quarter of 2023-24, GDP had grown by 8.2%. In The MPC decided to remain focused on withdrawal of
the fourth quarter (January-March) of 2023-24, GDP accommodation. This is expected to ensure that
had grown by 7.8%. inflation progressively aligns with the target of 4%,
while supporting growth.
- 2 -
Monthly Policy Review – August 2024 PRS Legislative Research
Industrial production grew by 5.1% in first Regulation Act where non-scheduled banks must
quarter of 2024-25 maintain cash reserves.
The Index of Industrial Production (IIP) grew by 5.1% ▪ Tenure of directors of co-operative banks:
in the first quarter (April-June) of 2024-25, compared The Banking Regulation Act prohibits the
to an increase of 4.8% in the same period in 2023-24.5,6 director of a bank (except its chairman or whole-
Mining increased by 7.9% in the first quarter of 2024- time director) to hold office for more than eight
25. In the corresponding quarter of 2023-24, mining years consecutively. The Bill seeks to increase
had increased by 6.4%. Manufacturing increased by this period to 10 years for co-operative banks.
3.8%, while electricity increased by 10.8% in the first
▪ Prohibition on common directors in case of co-
quarter of 2024-25. Note that manufacturing (78%) has
operative banks: The Banking Regulation Act
the highest weightage in the calculation of the IIP,
prohibits a director on a bank’s board to serve on
followed by mining (14%) and electricity (8%).
the board of another bank. This does not apply to
Figure 2: Growth in IIP (%, year-on-year) directors appointed by RBI. The Bill extends this
exemption to the director of a central co-
16%
operative bank. This exemption will apply where
14% he is elected to the board of a state cooperative
12% 10.8% bank in which he is a member.
10%
7.9% For a PRS Summary of the Bill, see here.
8%
6% 5.1%
Amendments to the Foreign Exchange
3.8%
4%
Management Rules, 2019 notified
2%
The Ministry of Finance notified amendments to the
0%
Foreign Exchange Management (Non-debt
Mining Mfg Electricity IIP
Instruments) Rules, 2019.13,14,15 The 2019 Rules
Apr-24 May-24 Jun-24 Apr-May 24 specify the framework for foreign investments in India.
The 2024 amendments allow swap of equity instrument
Sources: Ministry of Statistics and Programme Implementation; PRS.
and equity capital of Indian companies between an
Indian resident and a person residing outside India. As
per the Ministry, this will facilitate global expansion of
Indian companies through mergers, acquisitions, and
Finance
other strategic initiatives.13 The amendments also
allow 100% foreign investment in white label ATM
Tushar Chakrabarty (tushar@prsindia.org)
operations under the automatic route. White label
ATMs are set up, owned, and operated by non-banks.
Bill to amend banking laws introduced in Lok
A non-bank entity seeking to set up such ATMs must
Sabha
have a minimum net worth of Rs 100 crore at all times.
The Banking Laws (Amendment) Bill, 2024 was
introduced in Lok Sabha.7 It amends: (i) Reserve RBI revises directions for peer-to-peer lending
Bank of India (RBI) Act, 1934, (ii) Banking platforms
Regulation Act, 1949, (iii) State Bank of India Act,
The Reserve Bank of India (RBI) revised the Non-
1955, (iv) Banking Companies (Acquisition and
Banking Financial Company (NBFC) – Peer to Peer
Transfer of Undertakings) Act, 1970, and (v) Banking
Lending Platforms (Reserve Bank) Directions,
Companies (Acquisition and Transfer of
2017.16,17 A peer to peer (P2P) lending platform is an
Undertakings) Act, 1980.8,9,10,11,12 Key changes
intermediary providing loan facilitation services.
include:
NBFC-P2P are engaged in the business of running P2P
▪ Definition of fortnight for cash reserves: lending platform. RBI noted that some of these
Under the RBI Act, scheduled banks must platforms have adopted practices which violate the
maintain a certain level of average daily balance 2017 Directions. These include violating the
with the RBI as cash reserves. This average daily prescribed funds transfer mechanism and promoting
balance is based on the average of the balances peer to peer lending as an investment product with
held by banks at the closing of business of each assured returns. Key changes include:
day of a fortnight. A fortnight is defined as the
▪ Credit risk: The 2017 Directions provide that an
period from Saturday to the second following
NBFC-P2P must not provide or arrange any credit
Friday (including both days). The Bill changes
enhancement or credit guarantee. The
the definition of fortnight to the period from: (i)
amendments add that they must not assume any
first day to fifteenth day of each month, or (ii)
credit risk for transactions on their platform.
sixteenth day to the last day of each month. It
Entire loss of principal or interest must be borne by
also changes this definition under the Banking
- 3 -
Monthly Policy Review – August 2024 PRS Legislative Research
the lenders on the platform. Adequate disclosures purposes, unlike sustainable bonds which are used to
must be made to be lenders. finance specific projects.
▪ Disclosure by platform: NBFC-P2P platforms SEBI has also proposed to allow the issuances of
must disclose on their website the performance of Sustainable Securitised Debt Instruments (SSDIs).
their portfolio. This should include the Securitisation involves pooling certain types of assets
performance of non-performing assets. The together and repackaging them into interest-bearing
amendments add that the disclosures must include securities. These SSDIs will have sustainable finance
all the losses borne by lenders on principal, credit facilities as the underlying debt.
interest, or both.
Comments are invited by September 6, 2024.
▪ Investment products: The amended directions
prohibit NBFC-P2P platforms from promoting P2P SEBI issues draft circular on liquidity window
lending as an investment product with features for investors of debt securities
such as tenure linked assured minimum returns.
The Securities and Exchange Board of India (SEBI)
▪ Loan disbursal: Earlier, loans could not be issued a draft circular on introducing a liquidity
disbursed unless recipient of the loan was window for investors in debt securities.24 SEBI noted
approved by the lender and all participants signed that low secondary market transactions in corporate
the loan contract. The amendments add that loans bonds have led to the market being seen as illiquid.
cannot be disbursed unless lenders and borrowers This is in part driven by the presence of large number
have been matched/ mapped as per a policy of institutional investors who hold such bonds to
approved by the board of the NBFC-P2P platform. maturity. To address the issue, SEBI has proposed
establishing a framework for a liquidity window
RBI amends the regulatory framework for facility. The facility will operate through the use of put
housing finance companies options. A put option is a contract which gives its
buyer the right to sell an underlying security at a pre-
The Reserve Bank of India (RBI) amended the
determined price and at a specified time.
regulatory framework for housing finance companies
(HFCs).18 HFCs are non-banking financial companies As per the proposed framework, an entity issuing debt
(NBFCs) with at least 60% of their total assets securities (which will be listed) may provide the
constituting finance for housing.19 RBI observed that liquidity window facility to eligible investors. The
deposit accepting HFCs are subject to more relaxed facility will be provided only after one year from the
parameters compared to deposit accepting NBFCs. As issuance of the debt securities. It can be offered to all
regulatory concerns associated with deposit acceptance investors or to only retail investors.
are the same across all categories of NBFCs, such
Comments are invited by September 6, 2024.
HFCs will now be regulated in line with NBFCs.
RBI constitutes expert committee on
SEBI issues consultation paper on sustainable
benchmarking statistics
finance framework
The Reserve Bank of India (RBI) constituted an expert
The Securities and Exchange Board of India (SEBI)
committee (Chair: Dr. Michael Debabrata Patra,
released a consultation paper on expanding the scope of
Deputy Governor, RBI) to benchmark statistics
sustainable finance framework in the securities
disseminated by the RBI against global standards.25
market.20 Sustainable finance refers to accounting for
The committee will also: (i) study the quality of other
environment, social, and governance factors when
regular data where global benchmarks do not exist and
making investment decisions. Currently, sustainable
(ii) provide guidance on scope for further data
finance can be raised by issuing green debt securities.
refinement. The committee is required to submit its
Funds raised from such securities can be used for
report by the end of November 2024.
projects such as: (i) renewable energy, (ii) clean
transportation, and (iii) climate change adaptation.
SEBI has proposed that issuers be allowed to raise
funds through social bonds, sustainable bonds, and Personnel and Training
sustainability-linked bonds. Proceeds from social
bonds can be used to finance or re-finance social Tushar Chakrabarty (tushar@prsindia.org)
projects (such as affordable basic infrastructure, access
to essential services, and food security).21 Sustainable Cabinet approves Unified Pension Scheme for
bonds are used to fund a combination of both green and government employees
social projects.22 Issuers of sustainability-linked bonds
The Union Cabinet approved the implementation of the
commit to improving their sustainability outcomes in a
Unified Pension Scheme (UPS) for central government
predefined timeline.23 The funds raised through
employees.26 It will be effective from April 1, 2025.27
sustainability-linked bonds can be used for general
Under UPS, central government retirees will be
- 4 -
Monthly Policy Review – August 2024 PRS Legislative Research
provided assured pension of 50% of average basic pay determine ownership in case of uncertainty and
drawn over last 12 months prior to superannuation. submit a report to the state government.
Pension will be indexed to inflation based on Consumer
▪ Waqf Boards: The Act provides for election of
Price Index for Industrial Workers. This is similar to
members to these boards. Up to two members
the Old Pension Scheme applicable to employees who
each from electoral colleges of Muslim MPs,
joined in 2003 or earlier. To avail this, the retiree must
MLAs and MLCs, and Bar Council members
have a minimum qualifying service of 25 years.
from the state are elected. The Bill amends this to
Pension will be proportionately lower for lesser service
allow the state government to nominate one
period. Minimum pension of Rs 10,000 per month will
person to the Board from each of these electoral
be provided on superannuating after 10 years of
colleges. It also removes the criteria for these
service. An assured family pension of 60% of pension
persons to be Muslim. Members from the
of the employee prior to his death will be provided.
Muslim community will include mutawalli of the
UPS will be available as an option to employees along waqf, and two or more elected members from the
with the National Pension System (NPS). Current and Municipalities or Panchayat. It adds that a Board
future employees will have the option to join either must have: (i) two non-Muslim members, and (ii)
NPS or UPS. This choice can be exercised only once. at least one member each from Shias, Sunnis, and
Provisions for UPS will also apply to current retirees Backward classes of Muslims. It must also have
under the NPS.27 Under NPS, both employer and one member each from Bohra and Agakhani
employee contribute an amount towards the employee’s communities if they have waqf in the state. The
retirement corpus. To fund the additional expenditure Act provides for at least two of the members to be
under UPS, the central government’s contribution will women. The Bill changes this to specify that two
be increased from 14% to 18.5% of salary, while the of the Muslim members must be women.
employees’ contribution remains at 10%.27 The same
Comments can be submitted to the Joint Parliamentary
framework has been designed for state governments.
Committee till September 11, 2024.31
For a PRS Summary of the Bill, see here.
Minority Affairs Bill to repeal Mussalman Wakf Act, 1923,
introduced in Lok Sabha
Rutvik Upadhyaya (rutvik@prsindia.org)
The Mussalman Wakf (Repeal) Bill, 2024 was
Bill to amend law regulating waqf property introduced in Lok Sabha.32 It repeals the Mussalman
introduced in Lok Sabha Wakf Act, 1923.33 The Act provides for management
of wakf property, and keeping and publication of their
The Waqf (Amendment) Bill, 2024 was introduced in accounts. It defines wakf as dedication of any property
Lok Sabha.28 It amends the Waqf Act, 1995.29 The by a Muslim for causes considered religious, pious, or
Act regulates waqf property in India. The Act defines charitable under Muslim law. The Act does not apply
waqf as an endowment of movable or immovable to wakf covered under the Waqf Act, 1995.
property for purposes considered pious, religious, or
For a PRS Summary of the Bill, see here.
charitable under Muslim law. Every state is required to
constitute a Waqf Board to manage waqf. The Bill
renames the Act to ‘United Waqf Management,
Empowerment, Efficiency and Development Act,
1995’. The Bill has been referred to a Joint Civil Aviation
Parliamentary Committee for scrutiny (Chair: Mr.
Atri Prasad Rout (atri@prsindia.org)
Jagdambika Pal).30 Key features of the Bill include:
▪ Formation of waqf: The Act allows waqf to be The Bharatiya Vayuyan Vidheyak, 2024 passed
formed by: (i) declaration, (ii) recognition based on by Lok Sabha
long-term use (waqf by user), or (iii) endowment
when the line of succession ends (waqf-alal-aulad). The Bharatiya Vayuyan Vidheyak, 2024 was
The Bill states that only a person practicing Islam introduced and passed in Lok Sabha.34 It seeks to
for at least five years may declare a waqf. It replace the Aircraft Act, 1934.35 The Act regulates the
clarifies that the person must own the property civil aviation sector. It sets up three statutory
being declared. It removes waqf by user. It also authorities: (i) Directorate General of Civil Aviation for
adds that waqf-alal-aulad must not result in denial regulations and overseeing safety, (ii) Bureau of Civil
of inheritance rights to the donor’s heir including Aviation Security for overseeing security, and (iii)
women heirs. Aircraft Accidents Investigation Bureau for
investigation of accidents. The central government can
▪ Government property as waqf: The Bill states
issue directions to these authorities and review their
that any government property identified as waqf
orders, if necessary. The Bill retains this regulatory
will cease to be so. The Collector of the area will
- 5 -
Monthly Policy Review – August 2024 PRS Legislative Research
structure and most provisions of the Act. Key features the state government to constitute a State Disaster
of the Bill include: Response Force.
▪ Regulation of design of aircraft: The Act For a PRS summary of the Bill, see here.
regulates aircraft manufacturing, possession, use,
operation, and trade. The Bill retains this and also Centre constitutes committee to monitor
seeks to regulate design of aircrafts. situation at the India-Bangladesh border
▪ Powers to make Rules: The Act empowers the Rutvik Upadhyaya (rutvik@prsindia.org)
central government to make Rules on: (i)
regulation of activities related to aircrafts and The central government constituted a five-member
matters related to licencing, certification, and committee to monitor the current situation at the India-
inspection, (ii) regulation of air transport services, Bangladesh border.38 The committee will
and (iii) implementation of Convention relating to communicate with counterpart authorities in
International Civil Aviation of 1944. The Bill Bangladesh and ensure safety of Indian citizens and
retains these and adds that the central government minorities in Bangladesh. In August, the Ministry of
may make Rules on radio telephone operator External Affairs highlighted several attacks on
certificate and licences under the International minorities and their institutions in Bangladesh amidst
Telecommunication Convention. the large-scale unrest in the country.39
For a PRS summary of the Bill, see here. The committee will be headed by the Additional
Director General, Border Security Force (BSF), Eastern
Command. Other members include Inspector General,
BSF Frontier HQ South Bengal and Secretary, Land
Home Affairs and Ports Authority of India.
Disaster Management (Amendment) Bill, 2024
introduced in Lok Sabha
Law and Justice
Atri Prasad Rout (atri@prsindia.org)
Bill to reserve seats for STs in Goa Assembly
The Disaster Management (Amendment) Bill, 2024
introduced in Lok Sabha
was introduced in Lok Sabha.36 The Bill amends the
Disaster Management Act, 2005.37 The Act establishes Shirin Pajnoo (shirin@prsindia.org)
the National Disaster Management Authority (NDMA),
State Disaster Management Authority (SDMA), and The Readjustment of Representation of Scheduled
District Disaster Management Authority (DDMA) at Tribes in Assembly Constituencies of the State of Goa
national, state, and district levels. Bill, 2024, was introduced in Lok Sabha.40 The Bill
seeks to reserve seats in the Goa Legislative Assembly
▪ Functions of NDMA and SDMA: The Bill
for Scheduled Tribes (STs). Key features include:
provides that NDMA and SDMA will prepare
disaster management plans at their respective ▪ Estimation of ST population for reservation:
levels. The Bill introduces certain functions for The Bill requires the Census Commissioner to
these authorities. These include: (i) taking estimate the population of the ST communities in
periodic stock of disaster risks, including the state. The estimation will be based on the
emerging risks from extreme climate events, (ii) 2001 census. The Census Commissioner is
providing technical assistance to authorities below appointed by the central government under the
them, (iii) recommending guidelines for minimum Census Act, 1948.
standards of relief, and (iv) preparing national and
▪ Determination of reservation: The Election
state disaster databases. NDMA will also have
Commission will make amendments to the
the power to assess disaster preparedness of states
Delimitation Order to provide for the reservation
and undertake post-disaster audit of preparedness
of seats in the Assembly. This will be based on
and response.
the population determined by the Census
▪ Powers to states for disaster response: The Bill Commissioner. The Election Commission must
empowers the state government to constitute a invite suggestions from public and consider
separate Urban Disaster Management Authority for objections before making amendments to the
state capitals and cities with a municipal Delimitation Order. The reservation will be
corporation. The Urban Authority will prepare and applicable to all elections held onward from the
implement the disaster management plan for the dissolution of the current Assembly.
area under it. The Act provides for constitution of
For a PRS Summary of the Bill, see here.
a National Disaster Response Force for specialist
response to disaster situations. The Bill empowers
- 6 -
Monthly Policy Review – August 2024 PRS Legislative Research
SC constitutes task force to recommend safety Petroleum & Natural Gas
measures for medical personnel
Nripendra Singh (nripendra@prsindia.org)
Rutvik Upadhyaya (rutvik@prsindia.org)
Bill to amend law regulating oilfields
The Supreme Court constituted a National Task Force
introduced in Rajya Sabha
(NTF) to recommend measures to ensure safety of
medical professionals.41 Medical professionals include The Oilfields (Regulation and Development)
doctors, nurses, and interns. The Court noted several Amendment Bill, 2024 was introduced in Rajya
instances of violence against medical professionals. It Sabha.45 The Bill amends the Oilfields (Regulation and
also highlighted lack of safety standards in healthcare Development) Act, 1948.46 The Act regulates the
establishments. This includes absence of adequate: (i) exploration and extraction of natural gas and
resting facilities, (ii) security arrangements, (iii) petroleum. Key features of the Bill include:
proximate hostels, and (iv) separate toilets.
▪ Definition of mineral oils expanded: The Act
The NTF will recommend measures to prevent violence defines mineral oils to include petroleum and
against medical personnel and ensure safe and dignified natural gas. The Bill expands the definition to
working conditions. It will prepare an action-plan that include: (i) any naturally occurring hydrocarbon,
recommends improvements in areas such as security, (ii) coal bed methane, and (iii) shale gas/oil. It
infrastructure, and implementation of sexual clarifies that mineral oils will not include coal,
harassment laws. lignite or helium.
Ex-officio members of the NTF include Cabinet, ▪ Introduction of petroleum lease: The Act allows
Health, and Home Secretaries. Other members include for a mining lease that covers exploration,
directors, chairpersons, and heads of various medical prospecting, production, and handling of mineral
institutions such as AIIMS Delhi, AIIMS Jodhpur, and oils. Prospecting is the first step in finding oil and
National Institute of Mental Health and Neurosciences. gas. The Bill proposes replacing this mining lease
with a petroleum lease, which includes similar
The NTF will submit an interim report by September
activities. Current mining leases will remain valid.
10, 2024 and final report by October 20, 2024.
▪ Decriminalisation of offences: The Act imposes
penalties for rule violations with up to six months
in prison or a Rs 1,000 fine. The Bill changes this
Railways to a Rs 25 lakh penalty. It also adds new offences,
such as operating without a valid lease or not
Atri Prasad Rout (atri@prsindia.org) paying royalties, both punishable with Rs 25 lakh
fines. Continued violations can lead to daily
The Railways (Amendment) Bill, 2024 penalties of up to Rs 10 lakh.
introduced in Lok Sabha
For a PRS summary of the Bill, see here.
The Railways (Amendment) Bill, 2024 was introduced
in Lok Sabha.42 The Bill amends the Railways Act, Cabinet approves modifications in Pradhan
1989 and repeals the Railway Board Act, 1905.43 The Mantri JI-VAN Yojana
1905 Act provides for the constitution of the Railway
Cabinet has approved modifications to the Pradhan
Board to administer Indian Railways. The Bill seeks to
Mantri JI-VAN Yojana.47 The scheme supports
incorporate provisions regarding the Railway Board
development of advanced bio-fuel technologies, such
into the Railways Act, 1989.44 The 1989 Act provides
as second-generation ethanol. Revisions to the scheme
the legal framework for railways in the country.
extend its implementation by five years (till 2028-29).
The 1905 Act provides that the central government may The scheme has also been expanded to support projects
invest powers and functions of the government in the that use feedstock such as agricultural and forestry
Railway Board with respect to any or all railways. This residues, industrial waste, and algae.
may be done through a notification. The Bill
incorporates these provisions into the 1989 Act. It adds
that the central government will prescribe: (i) number
of members of the Board, and (ii) qualification, Commerce and Industry
experience, terms, conditions of service, and manner of
appointment for the Chairman and Board members.
Bill to replace the Boilers Act, 1923, introduced
For a PRS summary of the Bill, see here. in Rajya Sabha
Shrusti Singh (shrusti@prsindia.org)
The Boilers Bill, 2024 was introduced in Rajya Sabha.
It seeks to replace the Boilers Act, 1923. The Act
- 7 -
Monthly Policy Review – August 2024 PRS Legislative Research
regulates the manufacturing, installation, use, and Communications
repair of boilers and boiler components to ensure safe
operation. The Bill retains all provisions of the Act. Nripendra Singh (nripendra@prsindia.org)
The Statement of Objects and Reasons to the Bill states
that the Bill aims to enhance clarity of the provisions. Comments invited on several draft Rules under
the Telecommunications Act, 2023
For a PRS Summary of the Bill, see here.
The Department of Telecommunications has invited
Bill to replace the Indian Carriage of Goods by comments on draft Rules concerning: (i) interception of
Sea Act, 1925 introduced in Lok Sabha communication over the telecom network, (ii)
suspension of telecom services, (iii) (iii) cyber security
Anirudh TR (anirudh@prsindia.org)
of the telecom network, and (iv) designation of critical
The Carriage of Goods by Sea Bill, 2024 was telecom infrastructure.50,51,52,53 These Draft Rules have
introduced in Lok Sabha. It seeks to replace the Indian been issued under the Telecommunications Act, 2023.54
Carriage of Goods by Sea Act, 1925. The Act These seek to replace currently applicable Rules on
establishes the responsibilities, liabilities, rights, and these subjects.55,56,57 The draft rules retain most of the
immunities in case of goods carried from a port in India existing provisions.
to another port in India or any other port in the world.
Comments are invited until September 27, 2024.
The Bill retains all provisions of the Act.
For a PRS Summary of the Bill, see here. TRAI seeks views on regulation of spam
messages and calls
Bill to replace the Indian Bills of Lading Act,
The Telecom Regulatory Authority of India (TRAI)
1856 introduced in Lok Sabha
released a consultation paper on review of the Telecom
Anirudh TR (anirudh@prsindia.org) Commercial Communications Customer Preference
Regulations, 2018.58 The Regulations aim to address
The Bills of Lading Bill, 2024 was introduced in Lok
the issue of Unsolicited Commercial Communications
Sabha. It seeks to replace the Indian Bills of Lading
(UCC). UCC is any unwanted message or call from a
Act, 1856. The Act provides a legal framework for
sender who has not been authorised or whose contact
issuance of bills of lading. A bill of lading refers to a
the receiver did not consent to.59 The 2018 Regulations
document issued by a freight carrier to a shipper
require the registration of senders of commercial
containing details such as the type, quantity, condition,
communication, and templates of their content. It
and destination of goods being carried. The Bill retains
empowers the subscribers to block commercial
all provisions under the Act. The Bill adds that the
communication. It provides that the service providers
central government may issue directions for carrying
may act against unregistered telemarketers. Actions
out the provisions of the Bill.
include giving warnings, putting them under usage cap,
For a PRS Summary of the Bill, see here. or discontinuing service in case of repeated violations.
TRAI has sought comments on following key subjects:
Cabinet approves new industrial nodes under
(i) need for differential tariff for SMS and voice calls
the National Industrial Corridor Development
beyond a certain limit to disincentivise UCC, (ii)
Programme measures for pro-active detection of spam messages
and calls, (iii) whether explicit consent must be
Shrusti Singh (shrusti@prsindia.org)
mandatory for receiving promotional communication
The Union Cabinet approved development of new by auto dialer, (iv) provisions needed for timebound
industrial nodes under the National Industrial Corridor and effective redressal of complaints, and (v) financial
Development Programme.48 Under the programme, 11 disincentives to service providers for failing to curb
industrial corridors are being developed across the UCC on its network.
country.49 The newly approved industrial nodes will be
Comments are invited until September 25, 2024.
located in following areas: (i) Khurpia, Uttarakhand,
(ii) Rajpura-Patiala, Punjab, (iii) Dighi, Maharashtra,
(iv) Palakkad, Kerala, (v) Agra and Prayagraj, Uttar
Pradesh, (vi) Gaya, Bihar, (vii) Zaheerabad, Telangana,
(viii) Orvakal and Kopparthy in Andhra Pradesh, and Road Transport
(ix) Jodhpur-Pali in Rajasthan. These will be
Atri Prasad Rout (atri@prsindia.org)
developed as new smart industrial cities. The total
estimated investment in these new industrial nodes is
Voluntary vehicle modernisation programme
Rs 28,602 crore.
launched
The Ministry of Road Transport and Highways
launched the Voluntary Vehicle Modernisation
Programme or Vehicle Scrapping Policy.60 It aims to
- 8 -
Monthly Policy Review – August 2024 PRS Legislative Research
promote phasing out of unfit polluting vehicles across ARH units, and (ii) constructing, operating, and
the country. This will be implemented through a maintaining ARH units. For innovative
network of registered vehicle scrapping facilities and construction technology for ARH units, assistance
automated testing stations. of Rs 5,000 per sqm will be provided.
Currently, vehicle scrapping is promoted through ▪ Guarantee for housing loans: The corpus fund
incentives such as: (i) concessions on Motor Vehicle of the Credit Risk Guarantee Trust Fund has been
Tax, (ii) waiver of fee for registration certificate, and increased from Rs 1,000 crore to Rs 3,000 crore.
(iii) waiver of liabilities on purchase of new vehicles Under the fund, benefits of credit risk guarantees
available in many states. Scrapping facilities also are provided on affordable housing loans from
provide scrap value to vehicle owners. banks/housing finance companies/primary
lending institutions.
To incentivise scrapping, vehicle manufacturers have
volunteered to offer discounts on new vehicles against ▪ Funding of the scheme: The scheme is a
scrappage certificates. Discounts will only be extended centrally sponsored scheme, except the interest
for two years for commercial and one year for subsidy component which will be fully funded by
passenger vehicles. the central government.
Cabinet approved implementation of PMAY–
Gramin for five years
Housing
Atri Prasad Rout (atri@prsindia.org)
Cabinet approves the Pradhan Mantri Awas The Union Cabinet approved the continuation of the
Yojana – Urban 2.0 scheme Pradhan Mantri Awas Yojana – Gramin (PMAY-G)
between 2024-25 and 2028-29.62 Under the scheme,
Shrusti Singh (shrusti@prsindia.org)
government will provide assistance for the construction
of additional two crore pucca houses between April
The Union Cabinet approved the Pradhan Mantri Awas
2024 and March 2029. Assistance for each house will
Yojana – Urban 2.0.61 The scheme seeks to offer
remain unchanged at Rs 1.20 lakh in plain areas and Rs
financial assistance to one crore poor and middle-class
1.30 lakh in north-eastern and hilly states.
families in urban areas. It will be available for five
years. The assistance will be available for constructing, The scheme has been approved with a total outlay of Rs
purchasing, or renting. The total expected outlay is Rs 3,06,137 crore for five years. This includes central
2.3 lakh crore. Key features are as follows: share of Rs 2,05,856 crore and the states’ share of Rs
1,00,281 crore. PMAY-G was launched in 2016 with a
▪ Eligibility: The assistance will be available to
target of constructing 2.95 crore pucca houses by
households who do not have a pucca house
March 2024. Beneficiaries under the scheme will be
anywhere in the country and whose annual income
selected from an updated Awas+ list and will also
is up to nine lakh rupees.
include the remaining eligible households from the
▪ Assistance for construction: Eligible households Socio-Economic Caste Census (SECC) 2011. The
with an annual income of up to three lakh rupees government had conducted Awaas+ survey between
will receive Rs 2.5 lakh to build a house on their January, 2018 and March, 2019 to identify
vacant land. Landless beneficiaries may be beneficiaries previously left out under the SECC 2011.
granted land rights.
▪ Interest subsidy for purchase: Interest subsidy
of 4% will be offered on home loans of up to Rs 25
Agriculture
lakh. This will be subject to a maximum subsidy
of Rs 1.8 lakh payable in five yearly instalments.
Shrusti Singh (shrusti@prsindia.org)
▪ Purchase of affordable housing units: Assistance
of Rs 2.5 lakh will be provided for purchasing Cabinet approves programme for access to
affordable houses built through state, city, public, high-quality planting material
or private partnerships (AHP). Households with
The Union Cabinet approved the Clean Plant
an annual income up to three lakh rupees will be
Programme under the Mission for Integrated
eligible. A grant of Rs 1,000 per square metre
Development of Horticulture.63, 64 The programme
(sqm), up to 30 sqm per unit, will also be made
aims to provide high-quality and virus-free planting
available for AHP projects using innovative
material to farmers. This is expected to increase crop
construction methods.
yields and improve income opportunities. Under the
▪ Affordable rental housing: To make affordable programme, nine Clean Plant Centres will be set up
rental housing (ARH) available, following two across India focusing on specific fruit types. These
models will be implemented: (i) converting centres will be equipped with advanced diagnostic and
existing government-funded vacant houses into therapeutic facilities. To ensure accountability in
- 9 -
Monthly Policy Review – August 2024 PRS Legislative Research
production and sale of planting material, a certification will prepare inventory of suspected contaminated
system will be established under the Seeds Act, 1966. sites within their territories. They will submit
To facilitate the multiplication of clean planting the inventory to state/ central pollution control
materials, infrastructure support will be provided to boards. The local bodies will undertake
large-scale nurseries. preliminary assessment of suspected sites. If the
level of contamination is found to be above the
The programme aims to address the diverse agro-
screening level, the site will be categorised as
climatic conditions across regions by developing
probable contamination site. Detailed
region-specific clean plant varieties and technologies.
investigation will be conducted at these sites.
It will have an estimated outlay of Rs 1,766 crore and
will be implemented by the National Horticulture ▪ Role of pollution control boards: The State
Board, in association with Indian Council of Pollution Control Board will be responsible for:
Agricultural Research. (i) prioritising contaminated sites in the state for
remediation, (ii) ordering the persons responsible
Cabinet approves expansion of Agriculture for contamination to prepare remediation design,
Infrastructure Fund and (iii) developing the post-remediation
monitoring plan. The CPCB will be responsible
The Union Cabinet approved the expansion of the for: (i) issuing completion of remediation order,
financing facility under the Agriculture Infrastructure and (ii) granting SPCBs approval for levying
Fund (AIF).65 All eligible beneficiaries of the scheme financial penalty for violation of these rules.
will be allowed to create infrastructure under projects The responsible individual or company will pay
for building community farming assets. Integrated the complete cost of the remediation process.
primary secondary processing projects will be included
in the list of eligible activities under AIF. AIF credit Comments are invited by October 20, 2024.
guarantee coverage of Farmer Produce Organisations
will be extended through the NABSanrakshan Trustee Draft notification issued for recycling of non-
Company Pvt. Ltd. The AIF was launched in 2020 and ferrous metal scraps
additional storage capacity of 500 lakh tonnes has been
The Ministry of Environment issued Draft “Hazardous
created for agricultural produce under the fund.
and Other Wastes (Management and Transboundary
Movement) Second Amendment Rules, 2024”.68 These
were issued under the Environment (Protection) Act,
1986.69 The Rules regulate recycling of non-ferrous
Environment
metal scraps. Non-ferrous metals include aluminium,
copper, zinc and their alloys. Key features of the Draft
Atri Prasad Rout (atri@prsindia.org)
Rules include:
Comments invited on draft Remediation of ▪ Extended producer responsibility: Producers of
Contaminated Sites Rules, 2024 non-ferrous metal products will be liable for
recycling non-ferrous metal scrap. They will have
The Ministry of Environment, Forest and Climate
to meet recycling targets set by weight. The target
Change issued the draft Remediation of Contaminated
will take into account the quantity of non-ferrous
Sites Rules, 2024 under the Environment (Protection)
metal produced and the average life of products as
Act, 1986.66,67 These Rules pertain to remediation of
specified by the Central Pollution Control Board
areas contaminated by toxic and hazardous substances.
(CPCB). The producer will purchase an extended
Key features include:
producer responsibility certificate from registered
▪ Central Remediation Committee: The Central recyclers. The CPCB will generate the certificate
government will constitute the Central in favour of the recycler taking into account the
Remediation Committee with the chairman of quantity of metal recycled. The central
the Central Pollution Control Board (CPCB) as government can establish platforms for exchange
its chairperson. This Committee will be or transfer of these certificates as per guidelines
responsible for: (i) establishing procedures for specified by CPCB. Producers can also refurbish
determining remediation costs and the products made using non-ferrous metal.
responsible persons, (ii) reviewing detailed site Refurbishing can defer extended producer
investigations, and (iii) delineating the responsibility on recycling.
boundaries of confirmed contaminated sites and
▪ Portal for management: The CPCB will develop
the level of contamination. States and Union
an online portal to facilitate the process. Entities
Territories will constitute committees under the
such as manufacturers, producers, collection
chairmanship of their respective additional chief
agents, refurbishers and recyclers need to be
secretaries or principal secretaries of
registered on the portal. The portal will be used
environment departments.
for: (i) tracking scrap generation, (ii) filing
▪ Responsibilities of local bodies: Urban local quarterly and annual reports, and (iii) generating
bodies/ district level panchayati raj institutions extended producer responsibility certificates.
- 10 -
Monthly Policy Review – August 2024 PRS Legislative Research
▪ Stakeholders’ responsibilities: Bulk consumers Information & Broadcasting
of non-ferrous metal products will set up
collection points for agents to collect scrap. The Nripendra Singh (nripendra@prsindia.org)
collection agents will collect scrap from
manufacturers, producers, bulk consumers and Cabinet approved rolling out Private FM
supply to registered recyclers. All these Radio to 234 uncovered new cities
stakeholders will have to file quarterly and annual
The Union Cabinet has approved a third batch of e-
reports. Apart from recycling, manufacturers will
auctions for 730 FM radio channels across 234 cities.73
have to use a minimum percentage of domestically
These have been approved under the Private FM Radio
recycled material in new products.
Phase III policy at a reserved price of Rs 785 crore.
Comments are invited by October 13, 2024. The annual license fee for these channels will be 4% of
gross revenue, excluding GST.
Science and Technology
Mines
Nripendra Singh (nripendra@prsindia.org)
Atri Prasad Rout (atri@prsindia.org)
Cabinet approves policy to boost high
performance biomanufacturing Rules notified for Offshore Areas Mineral
Trust and auction of offshore areas minerals
The Union Cabinet approved the ‘BioE3 Policy for
Fostering High Performance Biomanufacturing’.70 The Ministry of Mines notified the Offshore Areas
Biomanufacturing uses biological systems of living Mineral Trust Rules, 2024 and the Offshore Areas
organisms for production. The Policy aims to Mineral (Auction) Rules, 2024. These have been
accelerate green growth by promoting issued under the Offshore Areas Mineral (Development
biomanufacturing. High performance and Regulation) Act, 2002.74,75,76 The Rules provide
biomanufacturing is defined as the ability to produce a for: (i) composition and functioning of the Offshore
wide range of products and address farming and food Areas Mineral Trust, and (ii) auction of production and
challenges through advance bio-technology. composite leases for minerals in offshore areas. Key
features of the Rules include:
The policy will provide innovation-driven support for
R&D and entrepreneurship across sectors such as: (i) ▪ Auction for leases and bidding parameters:
climate resilient agriculture, (ii) high value bio-based Production and composite licences will be
chemicals, (iii) marine and space research, and (iv) awarded through auction. Composite licence is a
biopolymers and enzymes. It will facilitate the two-stage licence providing for both exploration
establishment of Biomanufacturing and Bio-AI hubs and production. For both production and
and Biofoundry. Biofoundry is a laboratory that uses composite licences, the preferred bidder will also
automation in biomanufacturing.71 have to pay a performance security. If the
composite licence holder fails to complete
Cabinet approves Vigyan Dhara Scheme exploration within the specified time period, it
won’t be eligible for carrying out production.
The Union Cabinet approved the Vigyan Dhara
Performance security will be revised for the
Scheme from 2021-22 to 2025-26. 72 It merges three
composite licence holders eligible for
existing schemes implemented by the Ministry of
production lease.
Science and Technology. These relate to research and
development, and capacity building of individuals and ▪ Rate of contribution to the Offshore Areas
institutions in science. Mineral Trust: Production lease holders must
pay an amount equivalent to 10% of the royalty
The scheme will: (i) support the establishment of
as a contribution to the Offshore Areas Mineral
research labs, (ii) promote transnational collaborative
Trust Fund.
research and (iii) expand the number of full-time
researchers in the country. It will also conduct targeted
interventions to increase participation of women in
science and encourage innovation at school, industry
Power
and startups.
The scheme will receive an outlay of Rs 10,580 crore Nripendra Singh (nripendra@prsindia.org)
over five years.
Operational Guidelines for implementation
'Model Solar Village’ issued
The Ministry of Power notified the scheme guidelines
for implementing the ‘Model Solar Village’ component
- 11 -
Monthly Policy Review – August 2024 PRS Legislative Research
of the PM-Surya Ghar Muft Bijli Yojana.77 This Amendments to guidelines on cross-border
component aims to solarise one village per district. trade of electricity notified
Each model village will receive assistance of one crore
The Ministry of Power has amended the 2018
rupees from the centre.
Guidelines on cross border trade of electricity.79,80,81
The Model Solar Village will be identified through a These guidelines provide for import and export of
competition between villages of each district. Only electricity between India and its neighbouring
revenue villages with a population over 5,000 (or 2,000 countries. Key Features of the amendments are:
in special category states) can compete. Eligible
▪ Source of fuel for export of electricity from coal
villages will be identified by a District Level
and gas: Under the 2018 guidelines, Indian
Committee (DLC).
generation and distribution companies may export
Villages will be evaluated based on the renewable electricity generated from coal, gas, renewable
energy capacity installed within six months after all sources, or hydropower to neighbouring countries.
eligible villages for the competition are declared. After In case of coal and gas, electricity must be
a Model Solar Village is selected, states must develop a generated using imported fuel. Additionally, in
plan for transitioning it into a solar powered village. case of coal, coal from spot auction or commercial
mining (without specified end-use) may also be
CEA invites comments on cybersecurity used. The amendments empower the central
regulations for the power sector government to permit additional fuel sources for
export of coal and gas-based electricity.
The Central Electricity Authority invited comments on
the Draft Central Electricity Authority (Cyber Security ▪ Domestic sale by export-oriented entities: The
in Power Sector) Regulations, 2024.78 The draft amendments allow the Indian generators that
Regulations seek to protect the power grid from exclusively export electricity to also sell their
cyberattacks. Key features of the draft regulations are: output domestically under certain conditions. The
central government may provide permission for
▪ Cyber security response team for power sector:
this in case of: (i) sustained non-scheduling of full
CEA will establish a Computer Security Incident
or part capacity, or (ii) issuance of notice by the
Response Team for the power sector. Key
generator for default on payment.
responsibilities of this team include: (i) laying
down cyber security framework and protocol, (ii)
reviewing cyber security arrangements for the
sector, (iii) implementing a crisis management
Annexure
plan, and (iv) collecting and analysing cyber
threats and resolving cyber security incidents.
Parliament has constituted some of its Standing
▪ Scheme of trusted sources: The Ministry of Committees. The Departmentally Related Standing
Power may specify trusted sources for the Committees have not yet been formed. The subjects
procurement of certain ICT equipment and services identified for examination by the Estimates Committee
for the power sector. All entities must procure and the Committee for Welfare if SCs and STs are
equipment and services exclusively from the given below.
designated trusted sources.
Table 2: Subjects identified for examination by
▪ Responsibilities of regulated entities: The Parliamentary Committees
guidelines specify certain responsibilities for Estimates
entities operating in the power sector. These Ministry of Agriculture and Farmers Welfare
include generators, transmission companies, 1. Promotion of Climate Resilient Agriculture, Natural
despatch centres, distribution companies, and and Organic Farming through Krishi Vigyan Kendras
power exchanges. Key responsibilities include: (i) Ministry of Chemicals and Fertilizers
establishing an information security division 1. Growth of Chemical and Petrochemical Industries in
headed by the Chief Information Security Officer, the Country – A Review
(ii) formulating a cyber security policy and crisis 2. Implementation of National Pharma Policy
management plan, (iii) deploying adequate security
Ministry of Coal
measures such as firewalls and systems for
1. Coal Production and Coal Gasification Mission – A
detecting threats, and (iv) ensuring deployment of Review
equipment and applications only after testing and
Ministry of Commerce and Industry
verification as per the standards specified by the
1. Resurgence of Manufacturing in Toys & Games
Ministry of Power.
Sector
Comments are invited until September 10, 2024. Ministry of Communications
1. Performance of BSNL with focus on 4G & 5G Services
2. Review of the BharatNet Scheme and Broadband with
respect to Last Mile Connectivity
- 12 -
Monthly Policy Review – August 2024 PRS Legislative Research
Ministry of Consumer Affairs, Food and Public 1. Development of National Highways in India
Distribution Ministry of Skill Development and Entrepreneurship
1. Private Entrepreneurs Guarantee Scheme and Food 1. Performance of National Policy on Skill Development
Corporation of India-A Review and Entrepreneurship
Ministry of Cooperation Ministry of Tourism
1. Cooperative Movement and Development of 1. Development and Promotion of Tourism by ITDC
Cooperative Societies
2. Review of functioning of the Archaeological Survey of
Ministry of Defence India
1. Performance of Defence Research Development NITI Ayog
Organization
1. Plans and Programmes for Aspirational Districts – A
Ministry of Environment, Forests & Climate Change Review
1. Deforestation and Climate Change in Himalayan Welfare of Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes
Region
1. Examination of Annual Reports of National
2. Impact of Climate Change and Air Pollution on Commission for Scheduled Castes/Scheduled Tribes
Ecosystem presented under Article 338 (5)(d) and Article
Ministry of Finance 338A(5)(d) respectively of the Constitution of India and
1. Insurance Sector Coverage for Rural India and to report as to the measures that should be taken by
Marginalized Sections of the Society the Union Government in respect to matters within the
2. Utilization of funds raised through disinvestment of purview of the Union Government
Central Public Sector Enterprises 2. Study of atrocity cases against Scheduled Castes and
Scheduled Tribes with respect to implementation of
Ministry of Food Processing Industries
the Prevention of Atrocities Act, 1989
1. Implementation of Pradhan Mantri Formalisation of
Micro Food Processing Enterprises (PMFME) 3. Status of reservation of SCs/STs in Central Public
Sector Undertakings (CPSUs) including
Ministry of Health and Family Welfare
implementation of CSR (Corporate Social
1. Functioning of National Medical Commission and
Responsibility) policy for SC/ST communities.
Central Assistance in opening of Government Medical
4. Role of autonomous bodies/educational Institutions
Colleges.
like Central Universities, Engineering Colleges, IIMs,
2. Performance review of Food Safety and Standards
IITs, Medical Institutes in socio-economic
Authority of India
development and implementation of reservation policy
3. Policies and Programmes for Population Stabilization for Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes.
4. Safety Aspects of Health Professionals 5. Implementation of reservation policy in the
Ministry of Housing and Urban Affairs Ministries/Departments of Government of India
1. Urban Mobility and Metro Rail Network 6. Implementation of reservation policy in Public Sector
Ministry of Information Technology Banks/Financial Institutions/Reserve Bank of India and
credit facilities and other benefits being provided by
1. Artificial Intelligence and Regulatory Aspects for IT
such Institutions/Banks to the SCs/STs
Companies
7. Implementation of reservation policy in Union
Ministry of Jal Shakti
Territories including schemes for socio-economic
1. Assessment of Sewage Treatment Projects under
development of Scheduled Castes/Scheduled Tribes
“Namami Gange” Programme
8. Role of Tribal Cooperative Marketing Development
2. Atal Bhujal Yojana - A Review
Federation of India Limited (TRIFED) in
3. Performance of Jal Jeevan Mission in Rural Areas implementation of reservation policy and financial
4. Schemes and Programmes for Flood Management upliftment of tribals
and Irrigation 9. Reservation for Scheduled Castes and Scheduled
Ministry of Minority Affairs Tribes in Delhi Development Authority (DDA)
1. Programmes and Projects for Welfare of Minorities 10. Review of implementation of Scheduled Castes
Ministry of New and Renewable Energy Component plan (SCSP) and Scheduled Tribes
Component (STC)
1. Implementation of Pradhan Mantri Kisan Urja
Suraksha Evam Utthaan Mahabhiyan (PM-KUSUM) & 11. Status of implementation of Forest Right Act, 2006
PM Surya Ghar : Muft Bijli Yojana 12. Representation of Scheduled Castes and Scheduled
Ministry of Petroleum and Natural Gas Tribes in Higher Judiciary- A Review
1. Supply and Distribution of Natural Gas - Challenges 13. Representation of SCs/STs among civilians employed
and Prospects in the Armed Forces
Ministry of Power 14. Examination of proposal providing reservation to
Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes in Private
1. Evaluation of Hydro Power Projects in the Hilly
Sector
Regions
15. Constraints being faced by SCs/STs in matters
Ministry of Railways
relating to Caste certificates
1. New Railway Projects and Passenger Safety
Measures in Indian Railways – A Review
Ministry of Road Transport and Highways
- 13 -
Monthly Policy Review – August 2024 PRS Legislative Research
1 Bulletin 2, Lok Sabha, August 29, 2024, https://rbidocs.rbi.org.in/rdocs/notification/PDFs/NT605BE165AA9E
https://sansad.in/getFile/bull2mk/2024/29082024.pdf?source=loksab 8043EFA087339829CCF469.PDF.
hadocs. 20 Consultation paper on expanding the scope of Sustainable Finance
2 Bulletin 2, Lok Sabha, August 30, 2024, framework in the Indian securities market, Securities and Exchange
https://sansad.in/getFile/bull2mk/2024/30082024.pdf?source=loksab Board of India, August 16, 2024, https://www.sebi.gov.in/reports-
hadocs. and-statistics/reports/aug-2024/consultation-paper-on-expanding-the-
3 Press Note on Estimates of Gross Domestic Product for the First scope-of-sustainable-finance-framework-in-the-indian-securities-
Quarter (April-June) of 2024-25, Ministry of Statistics and market_85691.html.
Programme Implementation, August 30, 2024, 21 Social Bond Principles, International Capital Market Association,
https://www.mospi.gov.in/sites/default/files/press_release/NAD_PR_ June 2023,
30082024.pdf. https://www.icmagroup.org/assets/documents/Sustainable-
4 Monetary Policy Statement, 2024-25, Resolution of the Monetary finance/2023-updates/Social-Bond-Principles-SBP-June-2023-
Policy Committee (MPC) August 6 to 8, 2024, Reserve Bank of 220623.pdf.
India, August 8, 2024, 22 Sustainability Bond Guidelines, International Capital Market
https://rbidocs.rbi.org.in/rdocs/PressRelease/PDFs/PR851491EC642 Association, June 2021,
D77743A4BB8B0AAA838FE286.PDF. https://www.icmagroup.org/assets/documents/Sustainable-
5 “India's IIP records a growth of 4.2% in the June 2024”, Press finance/2021-updates/Sustainability-Bond-Guidelines-June-2021-
Information Bureau, Ministry of Statistics and Programme 140621.pdf.
Implementation, August 12, 2024, 23 Sustainability-Linked Bond Principles, International Capital
https://pib.gov.in/PressReleasePage.aspx?PRID=2044601. Market Association, June 2024,
6 Statement I: Index of Industrial Production - Sectoral, Ministry of https://www.icmagroup.org/assets/documents/Sustainable-
Statistics and Programme Implementation, finance/2024-updates/Sustainability-Linked-Bond-Principles-June-
https://static.pib.gov.in/WriteReadData/specificdocs/documents/2023 2024.pdf.
/may/doc2023512197401.pdf. 24 Introduction of Liquidity Window facility for investors in debt
7 The Banking Laws (Amendment) Bill, 2024, as introduced in Lok securities through Stock Exchange mechanism, Securities and
Sabha, Exchange Board of India, August 16, 2024,
https://sansad.in/getFile/BillsTexts/LSBillTexts/Asintroduced/bankin https://www.sebi.gov.in/reports-and-statistics/reports/aug-
g89202450403PM.pdf?source=legislation. 2024/introduction-of-liquidity-window-facility-for-investors-in-debt-
8 The Reserve Bank of India Act, 1934, securities-through-stock-exchange-mechanism_85689.html.
https://www.indiacode.nic.in/bitstream/123456789/2398/1/a1934- 25 RBI announces constitution of an Expert Committee on
2.pdf. Benchmarking
9 The Banking Regulation Act, 1949, of its Statistics, Reserve Bank of India, August 12, 2024,
https://www.indiacode.nic.in/bitstream/123456789/1885/1/A194910. https://rbidocs.rbi.org.in/rdocs/PressRelease/PDFs/PR8793D3198DE
pdf. E70F46E5AD5647673B1C03C8.PDF.
10 The State Bank of India Act, 1955, 26 “Cabinet approves Unified Pension Scheme”, Press Information
https://www.indiacode.nic.in/bitstream/123456789/1553/1/AAA1955 Bureau, Cabinet, August 24, 2024,
__23.pdf. https://pib.gov.in/PressReleasePage.aspx?PRID=2048607.
11 The Banking Companies (Acquisition and Transfer of 27 “GM CR briefs the Media on Unified Pension Scheme for
Undertakings) Act, 1970, Employees”, Press Information Bureau, Ministry of Railways,
https://www.indiacode.nic.in/bitstream/123456789/1373/4/a1970_5.p August 26, 2024,
df. https://pib.gov.in/PressReleaseIframePage.aspx?PRID=2048953.
12 The Banking Companies (Acquisition and Transfer of 28 Waqf Amendment Bill, 2024,
Undertakings) Act, 1980, https://prsindia.org/files/bills_acts/bills_parliament/2024/Waqf_(Ame
https://www.indiacode.nic.in/bitstream/123456789/1792/3/a1980_40. ndment)_Bill_2024.pdf.
pdf. 29 Waqf Act, 1995,
13 “Department of Economic Affairs amends Foreign Exchange https://prsindia.org/files/bills_acts/bills_parliament/2024/Mussalman
Management (Non-debt Instruments) Rules, 2019 in pursuance of _Wakf_(Repeal)_Bill_2024.pdf.
Union Budget 2024-25 announcement”, Press Information Bureau, 30 Lok Sabha Synopsis of Debates, August 9, 2024,
Ministry of Finance, August 16, 2024, https://sansad.in/getFile/Synop/18/II/SYN_09082024_ENG.pdf?sour
https://pib.gov.in/PressReleasePage.aspx?PRID=2046086. ce=loksabhadocs.
14 S.O. 3492(E), Ministry of Finance, August 16, 2024, 31 “Public Comments and Suggestions Invited on the Waqf
https://static.pib.gov.in/WriteReadData/specificdocs/documents/2024 (Amendment) Bill, 2024, All India Radio, August 28, 2024,
/aug/doc2024816377701.pdf. https://www.newsonair.gov.in/jpc-on-waqf-amendment-bill-2024-
15 S.O. 3732(E), Ministry of Finance, October 17, 2019, invites-views-suggestions-from-
https://enforcementdirectorate.gov.in/sites/default/files/Act%26rules/ public/#:~:text=The%20Joint%20Committee%20of%20Parliament,pr
Foreign%20Exchange%20Management%20%28Non- ess%20communique%20in%20this%20regard.
Debt%20Instrument%29%20Rules%2C%202019%20- 32 Mussalman Wakf (Repeal) Bill, 2024,
%20without%20amendment_2.pdf. https://prsindia.org/files/bills_acts/bills_parliament/2024/Mussalman
16 Review of Master Direction - Non-Banking Financial Company – _Wakf_(Repeal)_Bill_2024.pdf.
Peer to Peer Lending Platform (Reserve Bank) Directions, 2017, 33 Mussalman Wakf Act, 1923,
Reserve Bank of India, August 16, 2024, https://www.indiacode.nic.in/bitstream/123456789/19245/1/a1923-
https://rbidocs.rbi.org.in/rdocs/notification/PDFs/CIRCULARREVIE 42.pdf.
WMD0EF8079DFF124A3E9B223F4AAEE6D8A5.PDF. 34 The Bharatiya Vayuyan Vidheyak, 2024, Ministry of Civil
17 Master Directions - Non-Banking Financial Company – Peer to Aviation, August 9, 2024,
Peer Lending Platform (Reserve Bank) Directions, 2017, Reserve https://prsindia.org/files/bills_acts/bills_parliament/2024/As%20pass
Bank of India, October 4, 2017, ed%20by%20LS_%20Bharatiya%20Vayuyan%20Vidheyak,%20202
https://rbidocs.rbi.org.in/rdocs/notification/PDFs/MDP2PB9A1F7F3 4.pdf.
BDAC463EAF1EEE48A43F2F6C.PDF. 35 The Aircraft Act, 1934, Ministry of Civil Aviation,
18 Review of regulatory framework for HFCs and harmonisation of https://www.indiacode.nic.in/bitstream/123456789/2400/1/AAA1934
regulations applicable to HFCs and NBFCs, Reserve Bank of India, ____22.pdf.
August 12, 2024, 36 The Disaster Management (Amendment) Bill, 2024,
https://rbidocs.rbi.org.in/rdocs/notification/PDFs/NT618E21D4E059 https://sansad.in/getFile/BillsTexts/LSBillTexts/Asintroduced/disaste
654A64844371A4336600F1.PDF. r812024123302PM.pdf?source=legislation.
19 Review of regulatory framework for Housing Finance Companies 37 The Disaster Management Act, 2005,
(HFCs), Reserve Bank of India, October 22, 2020, https://www.indiacode.nic.in/bitstream/123456789/2045/1/AAA2005
___53.pdf.
- 14 -
Monthly Policy Review – August 2024 PRS Legislative Research
58 Consultation Paper on Review of the Telecom Commercial
Communications Customer Preference Regulations, 2018, Telecom
38 “Government of India constitutes a Committee to monitor the
Regulatory Authority of India, Ministry of Communications, August
current situation on Indo-Bangladesh Border (IBB)”, Ministry of
28, 2024, https://www. trai. gov.
Home Affairs, Press Information Bureau, August 9, 2024,
in/sites/default/files/CP_28082024. pdf.
https://pib.gov.in/PressReleaseIframePage.aspx?PRID=2043603#:~:
59 Unsolicited Commercial Communication, Telecom Regulatory
text=The%20Committee%20will%20be%20headed,%2C%20LPAI%
Authority of India, as accessed on August 30, 2024, https://trai. gov.
2C%20as%20its%20members..
in/what-spam-or-ucc.
39 “Suo Motu statement by EAM Dr. S Jaishankar in Lok Sabha on
60 The Ministry of Road Transport and Highways launches the
the situation in Bangladesh”, Ministry of External Affairs, August 6,
Voluntary Vehicle Modernisation Programme or Vehicle Scrapping
2024, https://www.mea.gov.in/Speeches-
Policy, Press Information Bureau, Ministry of Road Transport and
Statements.htm?dtl/38098/Suo_moto_statement_by_EAM_Dr_S_Jai
Highways, August 28, 2024,
shankar_in_Lok_Sabha__on_the_situation_in_Bangladesh.
https://pib.gov.in/PressReleseDetail.aspx?PRID=2049367.
40 The Readjustment of Representation of Scheduled Tribes in
61 “Cabinet approves Pradhan Mantri Awas Yojana – Urban 2.0
Assembly Constituencies of the State of Goa Bill, 2024,
Scheme”, Press Information Bureau, Cabinet, August 9, 2024,
https://sansad.in/getFile/BillsTexts/LSBillTexts/Asintroduced/goa852
https://pib.gov.in/PressReleasePage.aspx?PRID=2043924.
024124017PM.pdf?source=legislation.
62 Cabinet approves implementation of the Pradhan Mantri Awaas
41 Suo-Motu Writ Petition (Criminal) No. 2 of 2024, Alleged Rape
Yojana – Gramin (PMAY-G) during FY 2024-25 to 2028-29, Press
and Murder Incident of a Trainee Doctor in R.G. Kar Medical
Information Bureau, Ministry of Rural Development, August 9, 2024,
College and Hospital, Kolkata and Related Issues Versus, Supreme
https://pib.gov.in/PressReleseDetail.aspx?PRID=2043919.
Court, August 20, 2024,
63 “Cabinet approves the Clean Plant Programme under Mission for
https://api.sci.gov.in/supremecourt/2024/37351/37351_2024_1_66_5
Integrated Development of Horticulture”, Press Information Bureau,
4902_Judgement_20-Aug-2024.pdf.
Cabinet, August 9, 2024,
42 The Railways (Amendment) Bill, 2024, Ministry of Railways, Lok
https://pib.gov.in/PressReleasePage.aspx?PRID=2043920.
Sabha,
64 “Clean Plant Programme – A major leap forward in horticulture
https://sansad.in/getFile/BillsTexts/LSBillTexts/Asintroduced/AS%2
sector”, Press Information Bureau, Ministry of Agriculture and
0INTRO-2892024123726PM.pdf?source=legislation.
Farmers Welfare, August 11, 2024,
43 The Railway Board Act, 1905, Ministry of Railways,
https://static.pib.gov.in/WriteReadData/specificdocs/documents/2024
https://www.indiacode.nic.in/bitstream/123456789/2340/1/AAA1905
/aug/doc2024811373301.pdf.
____04.pdf.
65 “Cabinet accords approval for progressive expansion of Central
44 The Railways Act, 1989, Ministry of Railways,
Sector Scheme of Agriculture Infrastructure Fund”, Press
https://www.indiacode.nic.in/bitstream/123456789/1908/5/a1989-
Information Bureau, Cabinet, August 28, 2024,
24.pdf.
https://pib.gov.in/PressReleasePage.aspx?PRID=2049318.
45 The Oilfields Regulation and Development (Amendment) Bill,
66 S.O. 3550 (E), Ministry of Environment, Forest and Climate
2024, Ministry of Petroleum And Natural Gas, August 5, 2024,
Change, August 21, 2024
https://sansad. in/rs/legislation/bills
https://egazette.gov.in/WriteReadData/2024/256547.pdf.
46 The Oilfields (Regulation And Development) Act, 1948, Ministry
67 The Environment (Protection) Act, 1986, Ministry of Environment,
Of Petroleum And Natural Gas, 1948, https://dgm. assam. gov.
Forests and Climate Change,
in/sites/default/files/swf_utility_folder/departments/dgm_medhassu_i
https://www.indiacode.nic.in/bitstream/123456789/1876/4/A1986-
n_oid_4/menu/document/Oil%20Field%20Regualtion%20and%20De
29.pdf.
velopment%20Act. pdf.
68 Hazardous and Other Wastes (Management and Transboundary
47 “Cabinet approves Amendment in “Pradhan Mantri JI-VAN
Movement) Second Amendment Rules, 2024, Ministry of
Yojana” for providing financial support to Advanced Biofuel Projects
Environment, Forest and Climate Change, August 14, 2024,
using lignocellulosic biomass and other renewable feedstock”, Press
https://egazette.gov.in/WriteReadData/2024/256481.pdf.
Information Bureau, Ministry of Petroleum & Natural Gas, August 9,
69 The Environment (Protection) Act, 1986, Ministry of Environment,
2024, https://pib. gov. in/PressReleseDetail. aspx?PRID=2043926 .
Forest and Climate Change,
48 “Cabinet approves 12 Industrial nodes/cities under National
https://www.indiacode.nic.in/bitstream/123456789/4316/1/ep_act_19
Industrial Corridor Development Programme”, Press Information
86.pdf.
Bureau, Cabinet Committee on Economic Affairs, August 28, 2024,
70 “Cabinet approves BioE3 (Biotechnology for Economy,
https://pib.gov.in/PressReleasePage.aspx?PRID=2049312.
Environment and Employment) Policy for Fostering High
49 https://pib.gov.in/PressReleaseIframePage.aspx?PRID=1947855.
Performance Biomanufacturing”, Press Information Bureau, Ministry
50 G.S.R. 522(E), The Gazette of India, Department of
of Science & Technology, August 24, 2024, https://pib. gov.
Telecommunications, August 28, 2024,
in/PressReleseDetail. aspx?PRID=2048569.
https://egazette.gov.in/WriteReadData/2024/256724.pdf.
71 “These 'biofoundries' use DNA to make natural products we need”,
51 G.S.R. 519(E), The Gazette of India, Department of
Manufacturing and Value Chains, World Economic Forum, October
Telecommunications, August 28, 2024,
28, 2019, https://www. weforum. org/agenda/2019/10/biofoundries-
https://egazette.gov.in/Writereaddata/2024/256731.pdf.
the-new-factories-for-genetic-products/.
52 G.S.R. 520(E), The Gazette of India, Department of
72 “Cabinet approves the Department of Science and Technology
Telecommunications, Ministry of Communications, August 28, 2024,
scheme namely ‘Vigyan Dhara’”, Press Information Bureau, Ministry
https://egazette.gov.in/WriteReadData/2024/256727.pdf.
of Science & Technology, August 24, 2024, https://pib. gov.
53 G.S.R. 521(E), Department of Telecommunications, Ministry of
in/PressReleseDetail. aspx?PRID=2048574.
Communications, August 28, 2024,
73 “Cabinet approves rolling out Private FM Radio to 234 uncovered
https://egazette.gov.in/WriteReadData/2024/256725.pdf.
new cities / towns”, Press Information Bureau, Ministry of
54 The Telecommunications Act, 2023,
Information and Broadcasting, August 28, 2024, https://pib. gov.
https://egazette.gov.in/WriteReadData/2023/250880.pdf.
in/PressReleaseIframePage. aspx?PRID=2049325.
55 G.S.R. 18, The Gazette of India, Department of
74 Offshore Areas Mineral Trust Rules, 2024, Ministry of Mines,
Telecommunications, January 28, 2014,
August 9, 2024,
https://dot.gov.in/sites/default/files/358%20GI-
https://egazette.gov.in/WriteReadData/2024/256256.pdf.
2014%20dated%208.2.2014_6.pdf?download=1.
75 Offshore Areas Mineral (Auction) Rules, 2024, Ministry of Mines,
56 G.S.R. 1068(E), The Gazette of India, Department of
August 14, 2024,
Telecommunications, August 25, 2017,
https://egazette.gov.in/WriteReadData/2024/256437.pdf.
https://thc.nic.in/Central%20Governmental%20Rules/Prevention%20
76 The Offshore Areas Mineral (Development and Regulation)
of%20tampering%20of%20the%20Mobile%20Device%20Equipmen
Amendment Act, 2023,
t%20Identification%20Rules,2017.pdf.
https://mines.gov.in/admin/storage/app/uploads/64d9e910d2ea21692
57 G.S.R. 728(E), The Gazette of India, Department of
002576.pdf.
Telecommunications, September 26, 2024,
77 “Government of India issues Operational Guidelines for
https://police.py.gov.in/Prevention%20of%20tempering%20of%20th
Implementation of 'Model Solar Village’ under PM-Surya Ghar:
e%20Mobile%20Device%20Equipment%20Identification%20Numb
er%20(Amendment)%20Rules%202022.pdf.
- 15 -
Monthly Policy Review – August 2024 PRS Legislative Research
DISCLAIMER: This document is being furnished to you for
Muft Bijli Yojana”, Press Information Bureau, Ministry of New and your information. You may choose to reproduce or
Renewable Energy, August 12, 2024, https://pib. gov. redistribute this report for non-commercial purposes in part
in/PressReleseDetail. aspx?PRID=2044454 . or in full to any other person with due acknowledgement of
78 Draft of the Central Electricity Authority (Cyber Security in Power PRS Legislative Research (“PRS”). The opinions expressed
Sector) Regulations, 2024, Central Electricity Authority, August 16, herein are entirely those of the author(s). PRS makes every
2024, https://cea.nic.in/wp-
effort to use reliable and comprehensive information, but PRS
content/uploads/notification/2024/08/Draft_CEA_Cyber_Security_in
does not represent that the contents of the report are accurate
_Power_Sectyor_Regulations_2024_English_Version.pdf.
or complete. PRS is an independent, not-for-profit group. This
79 No 14/1/2017-Trans-Part(1), Ministry of Power, August 12, 2024,
document has been prepared without regard to the objectives
https://cea.nic.in/wp-
or opinions of those who may receive it.
content/uploads/notification/2024/08/Amendment_in_the_Guidelines
_for_Import_Export_Cross_Border_of_Electricity_2018.pdf.
80 No 14/1/2017-Trans-Trans-Pt (1), Ministry of Power, July 3, 2019,
https://cea.nic.in/wp-
content/uploads/2021/02/Addendum_on_Gas.pdf.
81 No. 14/1/2017-Trans, Ministry of Power, December 18, 2018,
https://cea.nic.in/wp-content/uploads/2021/02/Guidelines_2018.pdf.
- 16 -
