Monthly Policy Review
December 2023
Highlights of this Issue
Winter Session of Parliament held from December 4, 2023 to December 21, 2023 (p. 2)
Ten Bills were introduced and 17 were passed, including the three Bills that seek to replace the IPC, CrPC and Indian
Evidence Act, and the Bill to regulate the telecommunications sector.
Parliament passes Bills seeking to replace three criminal laws (p. 2)
These Bills retain most provisions from the earlier Acts. They also codify new offences such as terrorism, revise
provisions on bail and custody, and classify electronic evidence as primary evidence.
Parliament passes Bill to regulate the appointment of Election Commissioners (p. 4)
The Election Commissioners will be chosen by a selection committee consisting of the Prime Minister, the Leader of
Opposition in Lok Sabha and a Union Cabinet Minister.
Parliament passes the Telecommunications Bill, 2023 (p. 8)
The Bill regulates the telecom sector. It sets out the processes for the assignment of spectrum, authorisations needed,
and allows the government to intercept telecommunications.
Supreme Court upholds abrogation of Article 370 (p. 5)
The Court held the Article to be a temporary provision. It also directed the Election Commission to take necessary
steps to conduct elections in Jammu and Kashmir before September 2024.
Parliament passes three Bills related to Jammu and Kashmir (p. 3)
These Bills increase the total seats in the legislature from 83 to 90, reserve one-third seats for women in its legislature,
and substitute the reservation for ‘weak and under-privileged classes’ with ‘other backward classes’.
IRDAI issues draft regulations for insurance products (p. 6)
The draft regulations provide a framework for designing insurance products by considering aspects such as risk
coverage needs of customers and offering simple to understand products.
Scheme regarding private exploration agencies for strategic minerals announced (p. 15)
The scheme delineates the general conditions and mode of engagement of notified private exploration agencies by
central government and funding for exploration of critical and strategic minerals.
Current account deficit at 1% of GDP in second quarter of 2023-24 (p. 2)
Current account deficit in the second quarter of 2023-24 was significantly lower than the 3.8% of GDP recorded in the
corresponding quarter of 2022-23.
Standing Committee submits report on Ayushman Bharat (p. 11)
The Committee recommended measures such as increasing the budgetary allocation on the scheme, including wider
sections of the population within the scheme, and empanelling a wider range of hospitals.
Standing Committee submits report on Electric Vehicles (p. 11)
The Committee recommended measures such as extending the FAME Scheme, expanding charging infrastructure, and
providing further tax concessions on EVs.
Vision document on logistics and shipping released (p. 10)
The document identifies target-based actions for developing the maritime logistics sector. These are targeted to be
achieved by 2047, and include having carbon neutral ports and converting all ports to just-in-time arrival.
January 2, 2024
PRS Legislative Research Institute for Policy Research Studies
3rd Floor, Gandharva Mahavidyalaya 212, Deen Dayal Upadhyaya Marg  New Delhi – 110002
Tel: (011) 23234801, 43434035  www.prsindia.org
Monthly Policy Review – December 2023 PRS Legislative Research
Parliament Table 1: Balance of payments, Q2 2023-24 (USD
billion)
Arpita Mallick (arpita@prsindia.org) Q2 Q1 Q2
2022- 2023- 2023-
Winter Session 2023 concludes: Criminal 23 24 24
Reform Laws passed a. Exports 111.9 105.0 108.5
b. Imports 190.2 161.6 169.5
The Winter Session of Parliament was held from
c. Trade Balance (a-b) -78.3 -56.6 -61.0
December 4, 2023 to December 21, 2023. Parliament
sat for 14 days and adjourned sine-die one day before d. Net services 34.4 35.1 39.9
the planned schedule. e. Other transfers 13 12.3 12.8
Ten Bills were introduced during the session, and 17 f. Current account (c+d+e) -30.9 -9.2 -8.3
were passed. Bills introduced and passed in this g. Capital account 1.5 34.3 9.9
session include the Telecommunications Bill, 2023, and h. Errors and omissions -0.9 -0.6 0.8
three Bills replacing the Indian Penal Code, 1860, the
i. Change in reserves (f+g+h) -30.4 24.4 2.5
Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973, and the Indian
Sources: RBI; PRS.
Evidence Act, 1872 were withdrawn. Instead, three
new Bills were introduced and passed. Seven Bills
introduced in earlier sessions were also passed. These
include the Chief Election Commissioners Bill, 2023 Home Affairs
and the Post Office Bill, 2023.
Parliament passes Bills to replace three
146 members were suspended in this session. One
criminal laws
member (Ms. Mahua Moitra) was expelled from
Parliament on grounds of ethical misconduct. Rutvik Upadhyaya (rutvik@prsindia.org)
For more details on legislative business transacted
The Bharatiya Nyaya Sanhita, 2023 (BNS) , The
during the Winter Session 2023, see here.
Bharatiya Nagrik Suraksha Sanhita, 2023 (BNSS) and
For details on the functioning of Parliament during the the Bharatiya Sakshya Adhiniyam (BSA), 2023 were
session, see here. passed by Parliament.2,3,4 The BNS replaces the Indian
Penal Code, 1860 (IPC).5 The BNSS replaces the Code
of Criminal Procedure, 1973 (CrPC), and the BSA
replaces the Indian Evidence Act, 1872 (IEA). 6,7 Three
Macroeconomic Development Bills were introduced in Lok Sabha in August and
examined by the Standing Committee on Home
Tushar Chakrabarty (tushar@prsindia.org)
Affairs.8,9,10 They were later withdrawn and replaced
with new Bills, which incorporate most
Current account deficit at 1% of GDP in the
recommendations made by the Standing Committee.
second quarter of 2023-24
Key changes from the earlier laws include:
India recorded a current account deficit of USD 8.3 Bharatiya Nyaya Sanhita, 2023
billion (1% of GDP) in the second quarter (July-
 Terrorism: The BNS adds terrorism as an
September) of 2023-24, significantly lower than the
offence. It defines terrorism as an act that intends
deficit of USD 30.9 billion (3.8% of GDP) in the
corresponding quarter of 2022-23.1 In the first quarter to: (i) threaten the unity, integrity, and security of
the country, or (ii) likely to strike terror amongst
(April-June) of 20234-24, current account deficit was
the general public.
USD 9.2 billion (1.1% of GDP). Merchandise trade
deficit reduced from USD 78.3 billion in the second  Organised Crime: The BNS adds organised
quarter of 2022-23 to USD 61 billion in the second crime as an offence. This includes offences such
quarter of 2023-24. as kidnapping, extortion, contract killing, land
grabbing, financial scams and cybercrime carried
The capital account registered a net inflow of USD 9.9
billion in the second quarter of 2023-24 as compared to
out on behalf of a crime syndicate.
a net inflow of USD 1.5 billion in the corresponding  Offences by a group on grounds of identity:
quarter of 2022-23. In first quarter of 2023-24, capital The new offences include murder and causing
account registered a net inflow of USD 34.3 billion. grievous hurt by a group of five or more people on
grounds of certain identity markers as an offence.
Foreign exchange reserves increased by USD 2.5
These markers include race, caste or community,
billion in the second quarter of 2023-24 as compared to
sex, place of birth, language, personal belief, or
a decrease of USD 30.4 billion in the same quarter of
any other grounds. These offences carry the same
2022-23. In the first quarter of 2023-24, foreign
penalty as murder and causing grievous hurt.
exchange reserves had increased by USD 24.4 billion.
- 2-
Monthly Policy Review – December 2023 PRS Legislative Research
 Sedition: The BNS removes the offence of  Oral evidence: Under the IEA, oral evidence
sedition. It instead penalises the following: (i) includes statements made before Courts by
exciting or attempting to excite secession, armed witnesses in relation to a fact under inquiry. The
rebellion, or subversive activities, (ii) encouraging BSA allows oral evidence to be given
feelings of separatist activities, or (iii) endangering electronically. This would permit witnesses,
the sovereignty or unity and integrity of India. accused persons, and victims to testify through
These offences may involve exchange of words or electronic means.
signs, electronic communication, or use of
For a PRS analysis of the Bill, see here.
financial means.
For a PRS analysis of the Bill, see here. Parliament passes the Jammu and Kashmir
Reorganisation (Amendment) Bill, 2023
Bharatiya Nagrik Suraksha Sanhita, 2023
Tushar Chakrabarty (tushar@prsindia.org)
 Power to use handcuffs: The BNSS provides for
the use of handcuffs during arrest. It provides that The Jammu and Kashmir Reorganisation (Amendment)
handcuffs may only be used to arrest: (i) a habitual Bill, 2023 was passed by Parliament.11 The Bill
or repeat offender who has escaped custody, or (ii) amends the Jammu and Kashmir Reorganisation Act,
a person who has committed offences such as rape, 2019.12 The Act provides for the reorganisation of the
acid attack, organized crime, acts endangering state of Jammu and Kashmir into the union territories
sovereignty, unity and integrity of India. of Jammu and Kashmir (with legislature) and Ladakh
(without legislature). Key features of the Bill include:
 Successors deposing for transferred or retired
officers: The BNSS states that if an officer who  Number of seats in the Legislative Assembly:
prepared a document or report for an inquiry or The 2019 Act specified the total number of seats in
trial is transferred, retired or has died, the Court the Jammu and Kashmir Legislative Assembly to
will ensure that their successor officer deposes on be 83. It reserved six seats for Scheduled Castes.
the document. No seats were reserved for Scheduled Tribes. The
Bill increases the total number of seats to 90. It
 Detention of Undertrials: Under the CrPC, if an
also reserves seven seats for Scheduled Castes and
undertrial has served half the maximum
nine seats for Scheduled Tribes. In addition, the
imprisonment for an offence, he must be released
Act allocates 24 seats to constituencies in
on bail. This does not apply to offences
Pakistani-occupied Jammu and Kashmir.
punishable by death. The BNSS adds that this
provision will not be extended to: (i) offences  Nomination of Kashmiri migrants: The Bill
punishable by life imprisonment and (ii) adds that the Lieutenant Governor may nominate
undertrials charged under multiple offences. up to two members from the Kashmiri migrant
community to the Legislative Assembly. One of
 Collection of Forensic Evidence: The BNSS
the nominated members must be a woman.
mandates forensic investigation for offences
punishable with at least seven years of For a PRS summary of the Bill, see here.
imprisonment. In such cases, forensic experts will
visit crime scenes to collect forensic evidence and Parliament passes Bill reserving seats for
record the process on mobile phone or any other
women in Jammu and Kashmir legislature
electronic device.
Rutvik Upadhyaya (rutvik@prsindia.org)
For a PRS analysis of the Bill, see here.
The Jammu and Kashmir Reorganisation (Second
Bharatiya Sakshya Adhiniyam, 2023 Amendment) Bill, 2023 was passed by Parliament.13
 Documentary evidence: Under the IEA, a The Bill amends the Jammu and Kashmir
document includes writings, maps, and caricatures. Reorganisation Act, 2019.12
The BSA retains this classification. It classifies
 Reservation for women: The Bill reserves, as
electronic records as documents.
nearly as possible, one-third of all elected seats in
 Admissibility of electronic or digital records as the Jammu and Kashmir Legislative Assembly for
evidence: The BSA provides that electronic or women. This reservation will also apply to the
digital records will have the same legal effect as seats reserved for Scheduled Castes and Scheduled
paper records. It expands the definition of Tribes in the Assembly.
electronic records to include information stored in
 Commencement of reservation: The reservation
semiconductor memory or any communication
will be effective once the census conducted after
devices (smartphones, laptops). This will also
the commencement of this Bill has been published.
include records on emails, server logs,
Based on the census, delimitation will be
smartphones, and locational evidence.
undertaken to reserve seats for women. The
- 3-
Monthly Policy Review – December 2023 PRS Legislative Research
reservation will be in place for 15 years. However, be rotated after each delimitation, as determined by
it will continue till such date as determined by a a law made by Parliament.
law made by Parliament.
For a PRS summary of the Bill, see here
For a PRS summary of the Bill, see here.
Bill amending the Jammu and Kashmir
Law and Justice
Reservation Act, passed by Parliament
Rutvik Upadhyaya (rutvik@prsindia.org) Bill regulating the appointments of Election
Commissioners passed by Parliament
The Jammu and Kashmir Reservation (Amendment)
Bill, 2023, was passed by Parliament.14 It amends the Tanvi Vipra (tanvi@prsindia.org)
Jammu and Kashmir Reservation Act, 2004.15 The Act
provides for reservation in jobs and admission in The Chief Election Commissioner And Other Election
professional institutions to members of Scheduled Commissioners (Appointment, Conditions Of Service
Castes, Scheduled Tribes, and other socially and And Term Of Office) Bill, 2023 was passed by
educationally backward classes. Parliament.18,19 It replaces the Election Commission
(Conditions of Service of Election Commissioners and
Under the Act, socially and educationally backward Transaction of Business) Act, 1991.20
classes include: (i) people residing in villages declared
as socially and educationally backward by the Union As per the Constitution, the Chief Election
Territory (UT) of Jammu and Kashmir, (ii) people Commissioner (CEC) and other Election
residing in areas adjoining the Actual Line of Control Commissioners will be appointed by the President.
and International Border, and (iii) weak and under- The Bill specifies a procedure for appointing the CEC
privileged classes (social castes), as notified. The and other ECs. It adds that the President will make
central government may make inclusions or exclusions appointments upon the recommendation of a Selection
from category of weak and under-privileged classes, on Committee. Key features of the Bill are:
the recommendations of a Commission. The Bill
 Composition of Selection Committee: The
substitutes weak and under-privileged classes with
Selection Committee will consist of: (i) the Prime
other backward classes as declared by the UT of
Minister as Chairperson, (ii) the Leader of
Jammu and Kashmir. The definition of weak and
Opposition in Lok Sabha as member, and (iii) a
under-privileged classes is deleted from the Act.
Union Cabinet Minister nominated by the Prime
For a PRS summary of the Bill, see here. Minister as member. If the Leader of Opposition
has not been recognised, the leader of the single
largest opposition party in Lok Sabha will assume
Parliament passes Bill reserving seats for
the role.
women in Puducherry legislature
 Search Committee: A Search Committee will
Rutvik Upadhyaya (rutvik@prsindia.org)
prepare a panel of five persons for the
consideration of the Selection Committee. The
The Government of Union Territories (Amendment)
Search Committee will be headed by the Minister
Bill, 2023 was passed by Parliament.16 The Bill
of Law and Justice, and have two Secretary-level
amends the Government of Union Territories Act,
members. The Selection Committee may consider
1963.17 The Act provides for establishing Legislative
candidates who have not been included in the panel
Assemblies and constitution of Councils of Ministers
prepared by the Search Committee.
for certain Union Territories.
 Qualification of CEC and ECs: Persons who are
 Reservation for women: The Bill reserves one-
holding or have held posts equivalent to the rank of
third of all elected seats in the Puducherry
Secretary to the central government will be eligible
Legislative Assembly for women. This will also
to be appointed as CEC and ECs. Such persons
apply to the seats reserved for Scheduled Castes
must have expertise in managing elections.
and Scheduled Tribes in the Assembly.
 Conditions of service: The salary of the CEC will
 Commencement of reservation: The reservation
be equivalent to that of a Judge of the Supreme
will be effective once the census conducted after
Court. Other conditions of service such as medical
the commencement of this Bill has been published.
facilities and travel allowance will be determined
Based on the census, delimitation will be
by the President through Rules.
undertaken to reserve seats for women. The
reservation will be provided for 15 years. For a PRS analysis of the Bill, see here.
However, it will continue till such date as
determined by a law made by Parliament.
 Rotation of seats: Seats reserved for women will
- 4-
Monthly Policy Review – December 2023 PRS Legislative Research
Parliament passes the Repealing and laws passed by Parliament on other subjects with the
Amending Bill, 2022 concurrence of the state government.
Tushar Chakrabarty (tushar@prsindia.org) In August 2019, the Parliament adopted resolutions to
repeal the provisions of Article 370 through
The Repealing and Amending Bill, 2022, was passed Presidential Orders.28 It also passed a Bill reorganising
by Parliament.21 It repeals 65 laws that are obsolete or the erstwhile state of J&K into: (i) the Union Territory
that have been made redundant by other laws. It also of Jammu and Kashmir with a legislature, and (ii) the
corrects a minor drafting error in the Factoring Union Territory of Ladakh without a legislature. These
Regulation Act, 2011.22 decisions were challenged in the Supreme Court.29
For a PRS summary of the Bill, see here. The Supreme Court upheld the abrogation of Article
370. It held that: (i) the erstwhile state of J&K did not
Bill to amend the Advocates Act, 1961, passed have any sovereignty, (ii) Article 370 was a temporary
provision, (iii) the President had the power to declare
by Parliament
that Article 370 ceases to operate without the
Tushar Chakrabarty (tushar@prsindia.org) recommendation of the Constituent Assembly (which
was dissolved), (iv) Parliament can exercise the powers
The Advocates (Amendment) Bill, 2023, was passed by of the State Legislature for law making as well as non-
Parliament.23 The Bill replaces certain sections related law making purposes, and (v) the Constitution of J&K
to touts under the Legal Practitioners Act, 1879 and stands inoperative and has become redundant.
incorporate them in the Advocates Act, 1961.24,25 The
Considering the submission of the Solicitor General
1961 Act consolidates the law related to legal
that the statehood of J&K will be restored, the Court
practitioners and constitutes Bar Councils and the All-
stated that it is not necessary to rule on the
India Bar. Key features of the Bill include:
constitutional validity of reorganising the state into two
 Touts: The Bill provides that every High Court, union territories. It directed the Election Commission
district judge, sessions judge, district magistrate, to ensure that elections to the J&K legislative assembly
and revenue officer (not below the rank of a are conducted by September 30, 2024.26 It added that
district collector) may frame and publish lists of the statehood of J&K be restored as soon as possible.
touts. Tout refers to a person who: (i) either
proposes to procure or procures the employment of Standing Committee report on notaries
a legal practitioner in a legal business in return of
any payment, or (iii) frequents places such as the Rutvik Upadhyaya (rutvik@prsindia.org)
precincts of civil or criminal courts, revenue-
offices, or railway stations to procure such The Standing Committee on Personnel, Public
employment. Any person whose name is included Grievances, Law and Justice (Chairperson: Mr. Sushil
in the list of touts may be excluded from the Kumar Modi) submitted its report on the “Appointment
premises of the Court. of Notaries”.30 A notary is a public official who
authenticates contracts, deeds, and other documents
 Preparation of lists: The authorities empowered with a notarial seal. Documents authenticated by a
to frame and publish the list of touts may order notary have prima facie validity and are presumed
subordinate courts to hold an inquiry into the genuine. Key observations and recommendations of
conduct of persons alleged or suspected to be touts. the Committee include:
Once such a person is proven to be a tout, his name
may be included in the list of touts. No individual  Review notary fees: The Committee noted that
will be included in such lists without getting an notaries rely solely on client fees for income. It
opportunity of showing cause against his inclusion. observed that the prescribed fee is meagre and was
last updated in 2014. It recommended increasing
For a PRS summary of the Bill, see here. the fee payable to notaries and linking it with
inflation. It proposed a revision every five years.
Supreme Court upholds the abrogation of
 Appointment of notaries: The Committee noted
Article 370 of the Constitution
that the current eligibility requirement of 10 years
Rutvik Upadhyaya (rutvik@prsindia.org) of practice to become a notary is excessive. It
recommended reducing it to five years. It
A five-judge Constitution Bench of the Supreme Court suggested making it mandatory for applicants to
delivered its judgement on the abrogation of Article have appeared in at least 100 cases. Further,
370 of the Constitution.26 The Article conferred a notaries are currently appointed through
special status upon the erstwhile state of Jammu and interviews. It recommended adopting an
Kashmir (J&K).27 It limited the power of Parliament to examination similar to that of the All-India Bar.
legislate on matters related to defence, external affairs,
 Rationalising notary appointments: The
communications, and central elections for the erstwhile
Committee noted the need for a more structured
state of J&K. However, the President could extend
- 5-
Monthly Policy Review – December 2023 PRS Legislative Research
approach in determining the strength of notaries Repo rate kept unchanged at 6.5%
across states and union territories. The existing
Pratinav Damani (pratinav@prsindia.org)
criteria, based on the number of applications, was
deemed vague and lacking objectivity. The
The Monetary Policy Committee (MPC) of the Reserve
Committee recommended evaluation based on
Bank of India (RBI) retained the policy repo rate (the
factors such as population, litigation volume,
rate at which RBI lends money to banks) at 6.5%.35
economic and commercial activities in that state.
Other decisions of the Committee are as follows:
 Renewal of notary certificates: The Committee
 The standing deposit facility rate (the rate at which
recommended eliminating the mandatory renewal
the RBI borrows from banks without giving
of the certificate of practice every five years. It
collateral) has been retained at 6.25%.
suggested allowing notaries to practice until a
specified age determined by the government.  The marginal standing facility rate (the rate at
which banks can borrow additional money from
 Notarising of documents: The Committee noted
RBI), and the bank rate (rate at which RBI buys
that notarial work should be modernised and
bills of exchange) have been retained at 6.75%.
digitised with notarial records stored and
maintained in a centralised online database. It The MPC decided to remain focussed on the
recommended the government to ensure that all withdrawal of accommodation. This is in order to
public notaries maintain a digital register to keep ensure that inflation progressively aligns with the target
records of documents notarised by them. of 4%, while supporting growth.
IRDAI issues draft regulations for insurance
products
Finance
Tushar Chakrabarty (tushar@prsindia.org)
Bill replacing Provisional Collection of Taxes
Act passed by Parliament The Insurance Regulatory and Development Authority
of India (IRDAI) released the draft IRDAI (Insurance
Pratinav Damani (pratinav@prsindia.org) Products) Regulations, 2023.36 The Draft Regulations
provide a framework for designing insurance products
The Provisional Collection of Taxes Bill, 2023, was
and sets up committees to design the products. It seeks
passed by Parliament.31 The Bill repeals the
to repeal the following regulations: (i) the IRDAI
Provisional Collection of Taxes Act, 1931.32 The Act
(Micro Insurance) Regulations, 2015, (ii) the IRDAI
provided for the interim imposition or increase of
(Health Insurance) Regulations, 2016, and (iii) the
customs or excise duty. The Bill retains all the
IRDAI (Unit Linked Insurance Products) Regulations,
provisions under the Act.
2019.37,38,39 Key features include:
The Constitution requires a law for imposition of any
 Design and pricing: Design and pricing of
tax. This Act enables excise or customs duty proposed
insurance products must adhere to certain criteria.
in a Bill to be imposed before such a Bill is passed.
These include: (i) ensuring evolving risk coverage
The tax will be in effect until the Bill is passed, or for a
needs of customers, (ii) simple-to-understand
maximum of 75 days after its introduction.
products, (iii) premium rates not being excessive,
For a PRS Summary of the Bill, see here. inadequate, or unfairly discriminatory, and (iv)
factoring in relevant risks while pricing products.
Bill amending Central Goods and Services Act  Micro-insurance products: Micro-insurance
passed by Parliament products are designed for low-income groups.
They offer lower insurance cover along with low
Pratinav Damani (pratinav@prsindia.org)
annual premiums. The Draft Regulations specify
that such products may offer premium payment
The Central Goods and Services Tax (Second
based on the needs of the target market. Life,
Amendment) Bill, 2023 was passed by Parliament.33
general, or health insurers may tie up to offer
The Bill amends the Central Goods and Services Tax
combined micro-insurance products.
(CGST) Act, 2017.34 The Act provides for the levy and
collection of CGST on the intra state supply of goods  Product Management Committee (PMC): The
and services. board of insurers must constitute a Product
Management Committee (PMC). Responsibilities
The Bill changes the qualifications required to be
of the PMC include ensuring: (i) appropriate
appointed as a judicial member of the GST Appellate
product design for the target market, (ii) regulatory
Tribunal. Advocates with at least 10 years of
compliance, (iii) periodical reviews of product
experience will be eligible for appointment as judicial
performance, and (iv) modification or withdrawal
members of the Tribunal.
of the product, if required.
For a PRS Summary of the Bill see here.
- 6-
Monthly Policy Review – December 2023 PRS Legislative Research
 Review of products: All insurance products must disclosures include: (i) changes in the capital
be reviewed at least once a year by the appointed structure, directors, or auditors, (ii) details of any
actuary. The review should take into account: (i) defaults or delayed payments on any debt, and (iii)
reasonable expectations of all stakeholders, (ii) related party transactions. These details have to be
financial viability of the product, (iii) emerging provided for the current financial year (as on date)
risk and experience under the product, and (iv) any and the three preceding financial years. It has been
other relevant factors. The appointed actuary will proposed to allow issuers to provide such details as
present the results of the review to the PMC along of the latest quarter of the current financial year
with any recommendations to modify or withdraw instead of as on date of the issue.
the product.
RBI issues draft framework for self-regulatory
Comments are invited by January 3, 2024.
organisations
SEBI released amendments to listing Tushar Chakrabarty (tushar@prsindia.org)
regulations for public feedback
The Reserve Bank of India (RBI) has released a draft
Pratinav Damani (pratinav@prsindia.org)
framework for recognising self-regulatory
organisations (SROs) of regulated entities.43 RBI noted
The Securities and Exchange Board of India (SEBI)
that with the increase in number and scale of regulated
released a consultation paper on listing regulations for
entities, a need was felt to develop better industry
certain instruments.40 Regulations governing the issue
standards for self-regulation. Entities regulated by the
of securities include the SEBI (Listing Obligations and
RBI include banks, non-banking finance companies,
Disclosure Requirements) Regulations, 2015 and the
and payment system operators. SROs can improve
SEBI (Issue and Listing of Non-Convertible Securities)
effectiveness of regulations through technical expertise
Regulations, 2021 (NCS Regulations).41,42 These
and aid in framing regulatory policies. Key features of
regulations primarily govern the listing of various
the framework include:
equity and debt securities. The consultation paper
proposes amendments to these regulations. Key  Process for recognition: Interested SROs may
proposals include: apply to RBI for recognition. For this, it must
meet certain eligibility criteria. These include: (i)
 Reduction in denomination for issuance of
being registered as a not-for-profit company, (ii)
certain instruments: The Regulations require the
representing the sector and having specified
minimum denomination for privately placed debt
membership, and (iii) its directors must have
securities (securities offered to a select group of
professional competence, be financially sound, and
investors) and non-convertible redeemable
have general reputation of fairness and integrity.
preference shares (which cannot be converted to
equity shares) to be at least one lakh rupees. The  Adherence to specified principles: SROs should:
consultation paper proposes that the minimum (i) derive authority from membership agreements
denomination be reduced to Rs 10,000. In such to set ethical and governance standards, (ii)
cases, the issuer will have to appoint a merchant establish objective and consultative processes to
banker to carry out due diligence of such make rules for conduct of its members, (iii)
instruments and include them in the placement develop standards for improving compliance
memorandum. Such instruments must be interest culture, and (iv) have surveillance methods for
or dividend bearing instruments with a simple effective monitoring of the sector.
structure (no structured obligations).
 Responsibilities towards members: The primary
 Fast-track issues of certain debt securities: responsibility of the SRO towards its members will
SEBI is considering allowing a fast-track be to promote best business practices. Other
mechanism for the listing of debt securities. responsibilities include: (i) framing and monitoring
Eligibility criteria includes: (i) having specified adherence to the code of conduct for its members,
instruments listed for three consecutive years, (ii) (ii) developing a uniform and non-discriminatory
debt securities to be issued have a credit rating membership fee structure, (iii) establishing a
equal to ‘AA-’ or above, and (iii) no regulatory grievance redressal and dispute
action must be pending against the issuer. Some of resolution/arbitration framework for its members,
changes proposed for fast-tracking of issue of debt and (iv) promoting knowledge of
securities include: (i) reducing the time taken for statutory/regulatory provisions.
listing such securities from six days to three days,
 Membership criteria: SROs should have a good
and (ii) reducing the time for comments on public
mix of members at all levels to represent the sector
issue of debt securities from seven to two days.
holistically. Membership will be voluntary. The
 Disclosure of material events: The NCS minimum prescribed membership must be attained
Regulations requires certain information to be within two years from the grant of recognition.
disclosed while issuing instruments. These
Comments are invited by January 25, 2024.44
- 7-
Monthly Policy Review – December 2023 PRS Legislative Research
RBI issues draft licensing framework for SEBI issues consultation paper on
authorised persons under FEMA instantaneous settlement of securities
Tushar Chakrabarty (tushar@prsindia.org) Tushar Chakrabarty (tushar@prsindia.org)
The Reserve Bank of India (RBI) issued a draft The Securities and Exchange Board of India (SEBI)
licensing framework for authorised persons under the released a consultation paper on introducing
Foreign Exchange Management Act (FEMA), 1999.45,46 instantaneous settlements of securities.49 Since January
Under FEMA, only persons authorised by the RBI can 2023, funds and securities are settled by the day after
deal in foreign exchange or securities.47 Such persons the order is executed. SEBI has noted that the
may be designated as authorised dealers, money evolution of payment systems presents opportunities to
changers, or off-shore banking units. RBI noted that advance the clearing and settlement timelines. Benefits
with the liberalisation of foreign exchange regulations, associated with instant settlement include: (i) instant
a majority of transactions can be done without receipt of funds and securities, (ii) better investor
approaching the RBI. Key proposals include: control over funds and securities, (iii) freeing up of
capital in securities market, and (iv) enhancement in
 Forex correspondents: A new category of money
overall risk management. However, it has also
changers will be introduced under the revised
identified certain concerns such as increased cost of
framework. They will operate through an agency
trading and possible divergence in price of shares based
model by becoming forex correspondents of
on the settlement cycle. SEBI has proposed
certain categories of authorised dealers. Such
introducing an instant settlement mechanism for shares
entities will not be required to seek authorisation
on an optional basis. This will be implemented in two
from RBI.
phases. In the first phase, funds and securities will be
 Perpetual authorisation: Currently, authorisation settled on the same day. In the second phase,
for operating as category-II authorised dealers is individual trades will be settled instantaneously.
initially granted for one year. This can be renewed
Comments are invited by January 12, 2024.
for a period of one to five years. Category-II
authorised dealers can undertake non-trade related
current account transactions along with the
sale/purchase of foreign exchange for private and
Communications
business travel.48 RBI has proposed to renew the
existing authorisation of these entities perpetually.
Pratinav Damani (pratinav@prsindia.org)
It has also been proposed to allow these entities to
facilitate trade-related transactions of up to Rs 15 Bill to regulate telecom sector passed by
lakh per transaction.
Parliament
 Foreign banks: Foreign banks are currently
The Telecommunications Bill, 2023 was passed by
prohibited from operating as category-I authorised
Parliament.50 The Bill repeals the Indian Telegraph
dealers. These dealers can undertake all
Act, 1885, and the Indian Wireless Telegraphy Act,
permissible current and capital account
1933.51,52 The Bill also amends the Telecom
transactions.48 RBI has proposed to allow foreign
Regulatory Authority of India Act, 1997.53 Key
banks to operate as category-I authorised dealers.
features of the Bill include:
 Eligibility: Entities seeking to upgrade or renew
 Authorisation for telecom-related activities:
an existing authorisation as category-II authorised
Prior authorisation from the central government
dealers or seeking fresh authorisation as a
will be required to: (i) provide telecommunication
category-III authorised dealers must meet certain
services, (ii) establish, operate, maintain, or expand
criteria. Category-III authorised dealers can
telecommunications networks, or (iii) possess
undertake foreign exchange transactions incidental
radio equipment. Existing licences will continue
to their business.48 The eligibility criteria include:
to be valid for the period of their grant, or for five
(i) the entity being registered as a company, (ii) its
years, where the period has not been specified.
Memorandum of Association including the foreign
exchange activity for which authorisation is  Assignment of spectrum: Spectrum will be
sought, and (iii) complying with minimum net assigned by auction, except for specified uses,
worth requirements. where it will be allocated on an administrative
basis. These include purposes such as: (i) national
Comments are invited by January 31, 2024.
security and defence, (ii) disaster management, (iii)
weather forecasting, (iv) transport, (v) satellite
services such as DTH and satellite telephony, and
(vi) BSNL, MTNL, and public broadcasting
services. The central government may re-purpose
or re-assign any frequency range. The central
- 8-
Monthly Policy Review – December 2023 PRS Legislative Research
government may permit sharing, trading, leasing,  Removal of certain privileges of the central
and surrender of spectrum. government: The Act provides that wherever the
central government establishes posts, it will have
 Powers of interception and search: Messages or
the exclusive privilege of conveying letters by
a class of messages between two or more persons
post, as well as incidental services such as
may be intercepted, monitored, or blocked on
receiving, collecting, and delivering letters. The
certain grounds. Such actions must be necessary
Bill does not provide for such privileges.
or expedient in the interest of public safety or
However, the central government will have the
public emergency, and must be in the interest of
exclusive privilege of issuing postage stamps.
specified grounds which include: (i) security of the
state, (ii) prevention of incitement of offences, or  Power to intercept shipments: The Act allows
(iii) public order. An officer authorised by the for the interception of shipments being transmitted
government may search premises or vehicles for through the post on certain grounds. An
the possession of an unauthorised telecom network interception may be carried out on the occurrence
or equipment. of any public emergency, or in the interest of
public safety or tranquillity. Such interceptions
For a PRS analysis of the Bill, see here.
may be carried out by the central government, state
governments, or any authorised officer.
Bill to regulate newspapers and periodicals
passed by Parliament  The Bill provides that the interception of a
shipment being transmitted through post may be
The Press and Registration of Periodicals Bill, 2023, carried out on the following grounds: (i) security
was passed by Parliament.54 The Bill repeals the Press of the state, (ii) friendly relations with foreign
and Registration of Books Act, 1867.55 Key features of states, (iii) public order, emergency, or public
the Bill include: safety, or (iv) contravention of the provisions of
the Bill or any other law. An officer empowered
 Registration of periodicals: The Act provides for
by the central government through a notification
the registration of newspapers, periodicals, and
may carry out an interception.
books. It also provides for the cataloguing of
books. The Bill provides for the registration of  Removal of offences and penalties: The Act
periodicals, which include any publication prescribed penalties for several offences such as
containing public news, or comments on public theft, misappropriation, and the destruction of
news. Periodicals do not include books, or postal articles. The Jan Vishwas (Amendment of
journals of scientific and academic nature. Provisions) Act, 2023, amended the Indian Post
Office Act, 1898 to remove all offences and
 Foreign Periodicals: An exact reproduction of a
penalties.58 The Bill does not provide for any
foreign periodical may be printed in India only
offences or consequences, except one. Amounts
with the prior approval of the central government.
not paid or neglected by a user will be recoverable
The manner of registration of such periodicals will
as arrears of land revenue.
be prescribed.
For a PRS analysis of the Bill, see here.
 Press Registrar General: The Act provides for
the central government to appoint a Press Registrar
who maintains a register of newspapers. The Bill
provides for the Press Registrar General of India
Education
who will issue registration certificates for all
periodicals. Other functions of the Press Registrar
Rutvik Upadhyaya (rutvik@prsindia.org)
General include: (i) maintaining a register of
periodicals, (ii) making guidelines for the
Parliament passes Bill to establish a Central
admissibility of the title of periodicals, (iii)
University in Telangana
verifying circulation figures of prescribed
periodicals, and (iv) revising, suspending, or The Central Universities (Amendment) Bill, 2023 was
cancelling registration. passed by Parliament.59 The Bill amends the Central
Universities Act, 2009, which establishes central
For a PRS summary of the Bill, see here.
universities for teaching and research in various states.
Bill regulating the functioning of the Post Central Tribal University in Telangana: The Bill
Office passed by Parliament establishes a Central Tribal University in Telangana. It
will be named the ‘Sammakka Sarakka Central Tribal
The Post Office Bill, 2023 was passed by Parliament.56
University’. Its territorial jurisdiction will extend to
The Bill repeals and replaces the Indian Post Office
Telangana. It will provide avenues of higher education
Act, 1898.57 The Act provides for matters relating to
and research facilities primarily for the tribal
the functioning of the Post Office. Key features of the
population of India. Note that the Andhra Pradesh
Bill include:
Reorganisation Act, 2014 provides that the central
- 9-
Monthly Policy Review – December 2023 PRS Legislative Research
government will establish a Tribal University in the generating interest in space research through
state of Telangana. internships, workshops and outreach programmes.
For a PRS summary of the Bill, see here.
Standing Committee submits report on
Shipping
Research Based Education in India
Tanvi Vipra (tanvi@prsindia.org)
The Standing Committee on Education, Women,
Children, Youth and Sports (Chairperson: Mr. Vivek
Vision document on logistics, infrastructure
Thakur) submitted its report on the ‘Research Based
and shipping released for 2047
Education and Anusandhan Scenario in Sciences and
Related Fields’.60 The Committee reviewed the state of The Ministry of Ports, Shipping and Waterways
research in higher education and related fields. Key released the Amrit Kaal Vision 2047 for Logistics,
recommendations of the Committee include: Infrastructure and Shipping.61 The Document seeks to
promote maritime governance that ensures coordination
 Overheads: The Committee observed that the
between stakeholders, administrative authorities, and
costs associated with maintaining research
coastal communities.
infrastructure, such as laboratories and computers,
are considerable. It noted that current research It identifies 11 key themes, under which action points
funds disbursed by the government fall short in have been developed. These include: (i) enhancing
meeting the actual operating expenses. In light of India’s tonnage, (ii) enhancing efficiency through
this, the Committee recommended public funding technology and innovation, (iii) developing world class
agencies allocate additional funds for the ports, (iv) becoming a global player in shipbuilding,
development and maintenance of research repair and recycling, (v) enhancing modal share of
infrastructure. It also recommended having a coastal shipping and inland water transport, and (vi)
structured support scheme for catering to promote ocean, coastal and river cruise sector.
operational costs of research.
The Document also lays down strategic aspirations for
 Knowledge-exchange: The Committee Amrit Kaal Vision 2047. Some are listed below:
recommended that older: (i) Indian Institutes of
Table 2: Certain strategic aspirations under the
Technology (IITs), (ii) National Institutes of
Amrit Kaal Vision 2047 for Logistics, Infrastructure
Technology (NITs), and (iii) Indian Institutes of
and Shipping
Science Education and Research (IISER), guide
their newly established counterparts in research. It Current 2047
Parameter
also extended this suggestion to reputed and well- status Targets
established Central Universities that are engaged in Carbon neutral ports 0 14
research. Such mentorship would involve
India’s rank of passenger
knowledge-exchange, resource sharing and 4th 1st
volume in Asia Pacific
collaboration on research projects. This
Global rank in ship recycling 2nd 1st
collaboration would improve the research
capabilities and standards of new institutions, as Global rank in ship building 22nd Top 5
well as the country. Number of cruise terminals 6 25
 Prime Minister’s Research Fellows: The Number of operational
22 50+
Fellowship aims to identify and attract the best waterways
talent in research in India. It grants a fellowship of Number of trans-shipment hub 1 3
Rs 70,000 – 80,000 per annum, and provides a
Number of new major ports 0 2
research grant of two lakh rupees every year. The
Ports with just-in-time arrival 0% 100%
Committee noted that the Fellowship has been
awarded to nearly 3,700 students, since 2018. It Cargo volume handled by Greater
109
recommended significantly increasing the number waterways* than 500
of fellowships offered and grants disbursed. Overall port handling capacity* 2,500+ 10,000+
 Space Research: The Committee observed that Note: * refers to million metric tonnes per annum.
Sources: Ministry of Ports, Shipping and Waterways; PRS.
investing in space research not only drives
technological advancements but also aids in
addressing developmental challenges by improving
the monitoring of natural resources. It
recommended: (i) introducing specialised courses
in space sciences, astrophysics, and related fields,
(ii) establishing collaboration between universities
and space research organisations, and (iii)
- 10-
Monthly Policy Review – December 2023 PRS Legislative Research
Health Industry
Rutvik Upadhyaya (rutvik@prsindia.org) Pratinav Damani (pratinav@prsindia.org)
Standing Committee submits report on Report on the promotion of EVs released
Ayushman Bharat
The Standing Committee on Industry (Chair: Mr.
The Standing Committee on Health and Family Tiruchi Siva) presented its report on ‘Promotion of
Welfare (Chair: Mr. Bhubaneswar Kalita) submitted its Electric Vehicles in the Country’.63 Key observations
report on the ‘Implementation of Ayushman Bharat’.62 and recommendations of the Committee include:
The Committee has made observations on the
 FAME Scheme: The Faster Adoption and
Ayushman Bharat - Pradhan Mantri Jan Aarogya
Manufacturing of Electric (and Hybrid) Vehicles
Yojana (AB-PMJAY). The AB-PMJAY aims to
(FAME) in India was started in 2015. The
provide health cover of five lakh rupees per family per
objective of FAME-II is to encourage faster
year for secondary and tertiary care hospitalisation.
adoption of electric and hybrid vehicles (EVs) by
The scheme covers around 11 crore poor and
offering upfront purchase incentives and
vulnerable families, based on the Socio-Economic
establishing charging infrastructure. The
Caste Census, 2011. Key observations and
Committee noted that the number of vehicles
recommendations of the Committee include:
supported under FAME-II was reduced as
 Allocation: The Committee recommended compared to the initial targets. The Committee
increasing the overall health expenditure from the noted that more numbers of EVs need to be
existing level of 2.1% of the GDP. It also supported. Thus, they recommended extending the
emphasised on improving the utilisation of Scheme by at least three years and broadening its
available funds to improve the access and quality scope. It also recommended supporting more four-
of health infrastructure. wheeler EVs under the scheme with a cap based on
the cost and battery capacity of the vehicle.
 The Committee observed that barring 2022-23,
funds under the AB-PMJAY were under-utilised.  Charging infrastructure: The Committee
It added that annual allocation of Rs 6,000-7,000 observed that 22,000 charging stations have been
crore as central share is not sufficient for 33 sanctioned under FAME-II; however, 7,432 have
States/UTs. It recommended: (i) increasing the been set up. Thus, it was recommended that more
budget allocation of the scheme, and (ii) charging stations should be set up. It was
subsuming old schemes in the healthcare sector recommended that the setting up of charging
into the AB-PMJAY. stations should be incentivised for individual
investors, women self-help groups and cooperative
 Beneficiaries: The Committee recommended
societies by offering an assured return. The
considering aspects of the Affordable Care Act of
Committee also recommended the Ministry of
the US for including beneficiaries in the PMJAY.
Heavy Industries to conduct a study on the
These include: (i) including sections of the
feasibility of battery standardisation and formulate
population lying above the poverty line, (ii)
a battery swapping technology policy.
introducing ‘employer mandate’ to provide health
insurance for employees and their families, and  Cost of EVs: The Committee noted that the cost
(iii) subsuming schemes for children and senior of ownership for EVs is still relatively higher as
citizens into the PMJAY. compared to internal combustion engine vehicles.
The Committee noted that the Income Tax Act,
 Empanelment: Under the PMJAY, states/UTs
1961 allows individuals to claim tax savings on
can empanel public and private healthcare
interest paid for a loan to purchase an EV.64
providers from their own jurisdictions. The
However, this benefit was limited to loans
Committee observed that the healthcare providers
approved until March 31, 2023. The Committee
empanelled under the scheme were: (i)
recommended extending this benefit till at least
disproportionately distributed across states, (ii)
March 31, 2025. The Committee also observed
small in capacity with several bigger hospitals not
that almost half the cost of owning an EV comes
empanelled under the scheme, and (iii) lacking in a
from the batteries. It recommended reducing the
wide range of facilities. The Committee
GST levied on batteries by the central government.
recommended mandatorily empanelling hospitals
that: (i) avail tax benefits, (ii) have received land For a PRS summary of the report, see here.
grants, or (iii) are affiliated with medical colleges.
- 11-
Monthly Policy Review – December 2023 PRS Legislative Research
Labour Housing and Urban Affairs
Tanvi Vipra (tanvi@prsindia.org) Rutvik Upadhyaya (rutvik@prsindia.org)
Standing Committee submits report reviewing Parliament passes Bill extending the validity of
the national child labour policy the Act protecting unauthorised developments
The Standing Committee on Labour, Textiles and Skill The National Capital Territory of Delhi Laws (Special
Development (Chair: Mr. Bhartruhari Mahtab) Provisions) Second (Amendment) Bill, 2023 was
presented its report on ‘National Policy on Child passed by Parliament.66 The Bill amends National
Labour – An Assessment’.65 The Committee has made Capital Territory of Delhi Laws (Special Provisions)
several recommendations to Ministries that are directly Second Act, 2011.67 The Act protects unauthorised
and indirectly involved in eliminating child labour. development and encroachment by specified persons in
Key observations and recommendations include: the Union Territory of Delhi from punitive action.
These include slum dwellers, hawkers, unauthorised
 Prevalence of child labour: As per the 2011
colonies, schools, religious and cultural institutions,
Census, which is the latest available data, there are
and agricultural godowns. It requires the central
about one crore working children in the age
government to take certain measures to address these
bracket of 5-15 years. The Committee suggested
issues. These include: (i) finalising norms, policy
that various Ministries coordinate to conduct
guidelines, and strategies, and (ii) making orderly
periodic surveys to estimate the number of child
arrangements for relocation and rehabilitation.
labourers. Children typically work in the
unorganised sector, such as in garages, and The Act was initially valid until December 31, 2014,
construction sites. Some establishments outsource with subsequent amendments extending it until
manual work to contractors. In case the contractor December 31, 2023. The Bill further extends the
hires child labour, the principal employer is not validity until December 31, 2026.
held accountable. The Committee suggested
For a PRS Summary of the Bill, see here.
holding the principal employer responsible.
 Preventing instances of child labour: The
Committee highlighted that the Social Justice
Ministry must play a more significant role in Food and Public Distribution
eliminating child labour. It noted that economic
upliftment will ultimately prevent children from Tanvi Vipra (tanvi@prsindia.org)
being engaged in labour. The Committee has
made several recommendations to strengthen Cabinet approves mandatory use of jute bags
existing schemes of the Ministry. The for packaging foodgrains
recommendations include providing free
The Cabinet Committee on Economic Affairs has
competitive exam coaching to marginalised
approved reservation norms for the mandatory use of
children and rehabilitating individuals with
jute in packaging.68 These have been made under the
substance abuse issues. It also recommended that
Jute Packaging Materials (Compulsory Use in
the Housing Ministry ensure that existing legal
Packaging Commodities) Act, 1987.69 As per the
benefits reach construction workers so that their
packaging norms, all foodgrains and 20% sugar must
children are not forced to work.
be compulsorily packed in jute bags. These norms will
 Rescuing child labourers: In the past five years, be applicable for the jute year 2023-24, i.e., from July
about two lakh children engaged in child labour 2023 to June 2024.
have been rescued. The Committee observed that,
in comparison, very few FIRs were registered, and
very few children were produced before Child
Welfare Committees (a requirement under the Chemicals and Fertilisers
Juvenile Justice Act, 2015). It suggested
Tanvi Vipra (tanvi@prsindia.org)
penalising police officers for not registering FIRs,
similar to the Protection of Children from Sexual
Standing Committee submits report on
Offences Act, 2012.
promotion and development of pesticides
For a PRS Summary of the Report, see here.
The Standing Committee on Chemicals and Fertilizers
(Chair: Dr. Shashi Tharoor) presented its report on
‘Insecticides and Pesticides – Promotion and
Development including Safe Usage: Licensing Regime
for Insecticides’.70 Pesticides are broadly of four types:
insecticides, fungicides, herbicides, and bio-pesticides.
- 12-
Monthly Policy Review – December 2023 PRS Legislative Research
Herbicides kill/control the growth of weeds, and have over the last two years, the budget allocated for
the largest market share at 44%, followed by fungicides research and development to the Department of
(27%) and insecticides (22%). Key observations and Defence has been lower than the amount sought.
recommendations of the Committee include: DRDO’s expenditure as a share of total defence
expenditure has also continuously decreased. The
 Appropriate body to administer the law:
Committee recommended that adequate funds
Pesticides are regulated under the Insecticides Act,
should be provided to DRDO for research and
1968. The Act is administered by the Department
development. Budgetary grants of DRDO should
of Agriculture and Farmers Welfare, and is kept
be enhanced for India to become a global leader in
outside the purview of the Department of
armament and weapon systems. It expressed
Chemicals and Petrochemicals. The Committee
reservations regarding the utilisation of funds for
noted that the Chemicals Department plays a
existing research and development (R&D)
significant role in regulating pesticides since it is
activities in DRDO. It noted that while defence
responsible for taking up matters of the
PSUs approach DRDO for upgrades, they should
agrochemicals industry. It recommended that the
also have in-house centres for R&D.
Chemicals Department take the matter to an
appropriate forum to administer provisions related  Delayed projects: The Committee expressed
to agrochemicals. concern that out of 55 projects, 23 could not be
completed in time. In the past, the Committee has
 Balancing overuse of pesticides: The Committee
also noted that several DRDO projects are affected
noted the importance of pesticides in preventing
by time and cost overruns. Certain projects were
agricultural loss. While the Department has taken
also closed due to change in qualitative
measures to promote the use of pesticides, the
requirements or technological obsolescence. As
Committee noted that their extensive use can be
per DRDO, the reasons for closure of projects
harmful. It can pollute the air, water, soil, and the
include: (i) unanticipated technical complexities,
overall ecosystem which can cause serious health
(ii) technological denials, and (iii) price inflation in
hazards. The Committee recommended that
capital equipment. The Committee noted that
pesticide promotion measures be implemented
projects have been closed despite them being
stringently to ensure their balanced growth.
reviewed at various stages. It recommended
 Encouraging use of pesticides: Pesticide revisiting all review mechanisms as they may be
consumption in India is 0.5 kg per hectare, causing delays in some cases. Reviews should
compared to other countries where it is as high as include technical personnel and standard yardsticks
17 kg per hectare. This is despite India being the to avoid delays and cost overruns.
second largest producer of agricultural products.
 Indigenisation: DRDO takes up projects to
The Committee noted that this suggests that the
develop new technology and systems based on
Indian pesticide market is largely unpenetrated. It
evolving threat perception, among other inputs.
suggested that the Department study the
However, India is still dependent on foreign
agricultural practices in Japan and China, and take
countries for military platforms. Given the current
initiatives to boost the industry. The Department
rate of indigenisation, India may achieve 80%-90%
noted that pesticide usage of countries like China
indigenisation in the next 10 years. The
and Japan is due to their agricultural practices
Committee noted that continued dependence on
being more intensive.
imported weapon systems may discourage the
For a PRS Summary of the Report, see here. Make in India initiative. It recommended: (i)
greater professionalism in defence planning, (ii)
management of research and development, and (iii)
prioritisation on self-reliance.
Defence
For a PRS summary of the report, see here.
Tushar Chakrabarty (tushar@prsindia.org)
Standing Committee submits report on
External Affairs
working of DRDO
The Standing Committee on Defence (Chair: Mr. Jual Committee Report on G-20 released
Oram) presented its report on ‘A Review of the
Pratinav Damani (pratinav@prsindia.org)
Working of the Defence Research and Development
Organisation (DRDO)’.71 DRDO is involved in
The Standing Committee on External Affairs (Chair:
developing indigenous defence systems for the armed
Mr. P.P. Chaudhary) presented its report on ‘India’s
forces. Key observations and recommendations of the
Engagement with G20 Countries’.72 India hosted the
Committee include:
18th G-20 Summit on September 9-10, 2023. Key
 Research budget: The Committee observed that observations and recommendations include:
- 13-
Monthly Policy Review – December 2023 PRS Legislative Research
 Crypto assets framework: The Committee noted agreements and collaborate with these countries
that most G20 member countries do not have a for India’s energy security.
comprehensive regulatory framework for crypto
 Renewable energy: GCC countries want to invest
assets. The G20 countries have adopted a
in India in natural gas, green hydrogen, and clean
synthesis paper by the IMF and Financial Stability
energy technologies. Indian PSUs have also
Board on regulatory framework on crypto assets.
invested in green energy/technologies in GCC
The Committee urged the government to evaluate
countries. The Committee recommended that
recommendations of the paper and bring a
Indian PSUs may be incentivised to invest in GCC
comprehensive regulatory framework for crypto
countries in these sectors. It further noted that
assets. The Committee also urged the government
Kuwait and Qatar are yet to join the International
to introduce a crypto asset reporting framework
Solar Alliance (ISA). The Committee
with G20 members. This will ensure that non-
recommended that efforts should be made to
financial assets are not used to evade taxes.
persuade the two countries to soon join the ISA.
 India-Middle East-Europe Economic Corridor
For a PRS summary please see here.
(IMEC): The IMEC is a network aiming to
connect goods and services between Europe and
Asia. It was launched during the G20 Summit in
India. The IMEC envisages a rail corridor, digital
Petroleum
and electric connectivity, and pipelines for clean
hydrogen export. The Committee recommended
Tushar Chakrabarty (tushar@prsindia.org)
that the corridor should be made functional as per
the timelines to facilitate economic integration
Standing Committee submits report on import
between Asia, the Arabian Gulf and Europe.
of crude oil
 Global Biofuels Alliance: The Global Biofuels
The Standing Committee on Petroleum and Natural
Alliance was launched at the sidelines of the G20
Gas (Chair: Mr. Ramesh Bidhuri) submitted its report
Summit with the intent to expedite the uptake of
on ‘Review of Policy on Import of Crude Oil’.74 Key
biofuels. This is intended to be achieved through:
recommendations of the Committee include:
(i) technology advancements, (ii) intensifying
utilisation of sustainable biofuels, and (iii) setting  Diversification of sources: A majority of India’s
standards and certifications. The Committee noted hydrocarbon imports are sourced from the Middle
that the ethanol market is predicted to grow at a East region which is prone to geo-political
fast pace creating an opportunity for India. It tensions. This can disrupt supply. The Committee
recommended that the government address any noted that over-dependence on any region for
challenges that come in the way of the Alliance by crude oil and gas supplies can impact India’s
constant engagement with the members. energy security. It recommended that the Ministry
of Petroleum and Natural Gas take steps to
Standing Committee submits report on India diversify the imports of crude oil and gas.
and the Gulf Cooperation Council
 Reducing import dependence: India imported
Arpita Mallick (arpita@prsindia.org) about 87% of its crude oil consumption in 2022-
23. The Committee observed that the demand for
The Standing Committee on External Affairs (Chair: petroleum products is likely to increase in the
Mr. P.P. Chaudhary) submitted its report on ‘India and future. The government has prepared a roadmap to
Gulf Cooperation Council (GCC) – Contours of reduce dependence on imports in energy. It
Cooperation’.73 The GCC organisation comprises of provides for: (i) increasing domestic production,
six countries (Saudi Arabia, United Arab Emirates, (ii) promotion of bio-fuel and renewable energy,
Oman, Kuwait, Qatar, and Bahrain). It seeks to (iii) promoting energy efficiency, and (iv)
achieve coordination and integration in various fields improvement in the refinery process. The
among its members. Key recommendations and Committee recommended that the Ministry
observations of the Committee include: promote green hydrogen, electric vehicles, and bio-
fuels. It recommended that the Ministry set up an
 Strengthening energy security: The Committee
interdisciplinary group of experts to design policy
observed that GCC contributes to 35% of India’s
measures for reducing demand for fossil fuels.
oil imports and 70% of gas imports. India is
executing the second phase of its Strategic  Spot and term contracts: Crude oil contracts are
Petroleum Reserve (SPR). Several GCC countries done through term contracts and spot tenders.
have expressed their interest in it. The Committee Term contracts provide energy security as it
recommended that the government should actively provides for assured volumes over an agreed
engage with the GCC countries to secure their period (for a year or more). Oil PSUs undertake
participation in the second phase of the SPR. The spot purchases to meet requirements not covered
government should also consider signing more under term contracts. Generally, spot tenders tend
- 14-
Monthly Policy Review – December 2023 PRS Legislative Research
to be available at cheaper prices than term The agency must submit a bank guarantee of the
contracts. The Committee noted that the share of equivalent amount for availing advance.
spot purchases has increased from 27.6% in 2017-
18 to 35.1% in 2022-23. It recommended that the Draft Amendments to specify the average sale
Ministry should conduct a study/audit to determine price of certain strategic minerals, released
whether purchases in spot tenders have resulted in
cheaper cost. The Ministry of Mines released Draft Amendments to
the Minerals (Other than Atomic and Hydro Carbons
For a PRS summary of the report, see here. Energy Mineral) Concession Rules, 2016 for public
feedback.78,79 The Rules lay down the processes and
criteria for acquiring licences and leases. The draft
Rules have been framed under the Mines and Minerals
Mines
(Development and Regulation) Act, 1957.76
Mandvi Gaur (mandvi@prsindia.org) In October 2023, the 2016 Rules were amended to
specify the manner of calculation of Average Sale Price
Scheme for engagement of private agencies for (ASP) for certain critical and strategic minerals.80
exploration of strategic minerals notified These include such as lithium, platinum, rare earth
elements, and niobium. The Draft amendments seek to
The Ministry of Mines notified the scheme for the
specify the manner of calculation of ASP for certain
engagement of private agencies for the exploration of
other critical and strategic minerals. These include
critical and strategic minerals.75 Critical and strategic
beryllium, cadmium, gallium, selenium, titanium, and
minerals have been specified in the Schedule to the
vanadium. Critical and strategic minerals have been
Mines and Minerals (Development and Regulation)
specified in the Schedule to the Act. ASP is a key
Act, 1957.76 These include lithium, nickel, cobalt,
parameter for determining auction premium.
selenium, platinum, and gold. The scheme seeks to
boost the exploration of such minerals and provide The Draft Amendments provide that the average sale
funding for exploration operations through the National prices for the specified minerals will be based on the
Mineral Exploration Trust (NMET). Key features of prices published by the United States Geological
the scheme include: Survey or other reputable sources. The Indian Bureau
of Mines will publish the ASP for these minerals. The
 Process for approval: Interested agencies may
draft amendments specify multipliers for certain
select the area for exploration based on geoscience
minerals to arrive at the final price from the prices of
data and submit a proposal to the National Mineral
related compounds. These include tungsten, beryllium,
Exploration Trust (NMET). Within one month of
and tantalum.
receiving the application, NMET will forward the
proposal to the Geological Survey of India and
Comments invited on Rules regarding
concerned state governments for their comments.
concessions for minerals in offshore areas
The comments should be provided within a month.
Once the period for comments is over, NMET The Ministry of Mines released two draft rules: (i) the
must grant in-principle approval or reject the Offshore Areas Mineral (Auction) Rules, 2023 and (ii)
applications within 15 days. Upon the in-principle the Offshore Areas Minerals (Existence of Mineral
approval, the agency must submit a detailed Resources) Rules, 2023. These have been issued under
proposal for NMET's final sanction. the Offshore Areas Mineral (Development and
Regulation) Act, 2002.81,82 The Act regulates mining in
 Terms and conditions regarding mineral
maritime zones. Key features of the draft Rules are:
concessions: The approval for exploration will not
provide any rights for mineral concessions,  Auction for granting concessions: The following
including a mining lease. However, the agency concessions for minerals in offshore areas will be
may participate in the auction of mineral granted through a competitive bidding process: (i)
concessions over the block or a part it has composite licence, which grants rights for
explored. Any related party to the authorised exploration as well as mining, and (ii) production
agency participating in the auctions must be lease, for undertaking mining. For auctions of
declared in advance. these concessions, a reserve price will be specified.
The reserve price will be in terms of the minimum
 Advance for exploration projects: NMET will
percentage of the value of the mineral dispatched.
fund the projects approved under this scheme as
The value of the mineral will be equal to the
per the established norms. It will cover various
product of minerals dispatched in a month and the
stages of investigation of these exploration projects
sale price of the mineral published by the Indian
such as reconnaissance survey, preliminary
Bureau of Mines.
exploration, general exploration, and detailed
exploration.77 The authorised agency may avail up  Identification of areas for concessions: A
to 30% of the project cost from NMET as advance. production lease may be granted for an area for
- 15-
Monthly Policy Review – December 2023 PRS Legislative Research
which at least general exploration has been advice or within 15 days overall. The Rules
completed, and a geological study report has been prohibit export to a country which has not adopted
prepared. General exploration establishes the main the Convention on International Trade in
geological features of a deposit. It includes an Endangered Species.
initial estimate of the size, shape, and structure of
 Cancellation of permit: The Management
mineralised zones, and the quantity and grade of
Authority may cancel a permit on grounds such as:
the mineral deposit.
(i) potential commercial use of the specimen, (ii)
 A composite licence may be granted for an area for inability of the recipient to care for certain species
which: (i) at least the reconnaissance survey has such as sea turtles, and river dolphins, and (iii) not
been completed, or mineral potential of the mineral minimising risks while handling living specimens
block has been identified based on existing such as striped civet, and pigmy hippopotamus.
geoscience data but resources are yet to
established, and (ii) a geological study report has
been prepared. Reconnaissance refers to a
preliminary survey to locate mineral resources. Consumer Affairs
Comments are invited until January 25, 2024.
Mandvi Gaur (mandvi@prsindia.org)
Standing Committee submits report on
protection of consumer rights in northeast
Environment
The Standing Committee on Consumer Affairs, Food
Mandvi Gaur (mandvi@prsindia.org) and Public Distribution (Chair: Ms. Locket Chatterjee)
submitted its report on ‘Initiatives in the North East in
Wild Life (Protection) International Trade of the Field of Consumer Rights Protection’.85 Key
Specimen Rules, 2023 notified recommendations of the Committee include:
The Ministry of Environment, Forest and Climate  Consumer Protection Councils: The Consumer
Change notified Rules to regulate the international Protection Councils safeguard consumer interests
trade of certain plant and animal specimens.83 These by monitoring and enforcing consumer protection
Rules have been made under the Wild Life (Protection) laws, facilitating consumer education, and advising
Act, 1972.84 The Act prohibits the international trade government on consumer protection issues. The
of endangered species of wild fauna and flora, except Committee observed that the State and District
with a valid permit or certificate. The Rules specify the Consumer Protection Councils in the north east are
conditions for granting such permits. Key features of not functioning as required under the law. They
the Rules are as follows: have either not been set up or they do not meet
regularly. It recommended that the central
 Trading permit: A permit may be granted for
government ensure their effective establishment
import, export, or re-export of endangered plant
and regular functioning.
and animal specimens. The Management
Authority established under the Act will be  Consumer Commissions: The central
responsible for granting these permits. An government is running two schemes to strengthen
application must be submitted with documents the infrastructure of the Consumer Commissions in
such as a legal procurement certificate. An export the north-east region. Consumer Commissions
and re-export permit will be valid for six months have been set up at the district, state, and national
and an import permit will be valid for 12 months. levels to resolve disputes. The Committee
observed that in 2022-23, only four northeastern
 Survival assessment study: Before granting an
states had sought financial assistance under these
import permit, the Management Authority must
schemes. It recommended the Ministry to: (i)
refer an application to the Scientific Authority for a
assess the functioning and infrastructure
survival assessment and to verify whether the
availability of Consumer Commissions in the north
recipient is equipped to care for the specimen. The
east, and (ii) provide necessary central assistance
Scientific Authority is a research institute notified
under the schemes.
by the central government. In case of an export
permit, a survival assessment may be conducted  Labs for legal metrology: India has six regional
for specified animals such as Asian elephants, labs for legal metrology. Legal metrology refers to
Indian python and gibbon if no such study has standards for weights and measures. In the
been previously conducted. In both cases, the northeast, only Assam has such a lab. Considering
Scientific Authority must respond with advice
within 30 days.
 The Management Authority must accept or reject
the application within 15 days of receiving the
- 16-
Monthly Policy Review – December 2023 PRS Legislative Research
the geographical size of the northeast, the WDRA for enhanced coordination with state
Committee recommended establishing more labs. warehousing corporations.
Standing Committee submits report on the
functioning of the warehousing authority
Road Transport and Highways
The Standing Committee on Consumer Affairs, Food
and Public Distribution (Chair: Ms. Locket Chatterjee) Tanvi Vipra (tanvi@prsindia.org)
submitted its report on ‘Functioning of Warehousing
Development and Regulatory Authority (WDRA)’.86 Rules amended to mandate air-conditioned
WDRA is a statutory body responsible for the cabins in goods transport vehicles
regulation and development of warehousing businesses
The Ministry of Road Transport and Highways
in the country. Key observations and recommendations
amended the Central Motor Vehicles Rules, 1989.87,88
of the Committee include:
The Rules have been made under the Motor Vehicles
 Waiver of registration fees: Warehouses that Act, 1988, and provide for testing and approvals of
intend to issue negotiable warehouse receipts vehicles.89 The Rules add that specified good transport
(NWR) must be registered with WDRA. NWR vehicles that are manufactured on or after October 2025
indicate the storage of goods in the warehouse. It must be fitted with air-conditioned cabins. Specified
allows for the transfer of ownership without having good transport vehicles include those whose weight is
to deliver goods physically. A fee is applicable for between 3.5 and 12 tonnes. For drive away chassis,
the registration of warehouses. This fee has been i.e., a vehicle frame that can be driven, the chassis
waived for warehouses storing only agricultural manufacturer must supply an air conditioning system
goods until October 2025. In contrast, warehouses kit as per specified standards.
storing non-agricultural goods, or both agricultural
and non-agricultural goods, are subject to a
registration fee ranging between Rs 50,000 and
one lakh rupees. The Committee recommended
waiving fees for them to encourage registration.
 Establishing regional offices: The Committee
recommended opening regional offices of the
1 Developments in India’s Balance of Payments during the Second 10 Report No. 248, ‘The Bhartiya Sakshya Bill, 2023’, The Standing
Quarter (July-September) of 2023-24, Reserve Bank of India, Committee on Home Affairs, Rajya Sabha, November 10, 2023,
December 26, 2023, https://prsindia.org/files/bills_acts/bills_parliament/2023/SC_Report_
https://rbidocs.rbi.org.in/rdocs/PressRelease/PDFs/PR1541BOP2F8D Bharatiya_Sakshya_Bill_2023.pdf
9332E18B45B7A3CFEA09D087A8C6.PDF. 11 The Jammu and Kashmir Reorganisation (Amendment) Act, 2023,
2 The Bharatiya Nyaya Sanhita, 2023, https://egazette.gov.in/(S(qhylxpamjdu1qk4giekgb2lq))/ViewPDF.as
https://egazette.gov.in/(S(etn2xtmrt1tpds5cj4fflzmm))/ViewPDF.asp px.
x 12 The Jammu and Kashmir Reorganisation Act, 2019,
The Bharatiya Nagrik Suraksha Sanhita, 2023, https://www.indiacode.nic.in/bitstream/123456789/12030/1/A2019-
https://egazette.gov.in/(S(etn2xtmrt1tpds5cj4fflzmm))/ViewPDF.asp 34.pdf.
x 13 The Jammu and Kashmir Reorganisation (Second Amendment)
4 The Bharatiya Sakshya Adhiniyam, 2023, Bill, 2023,
https://egazette.gov.in/(S(etn2xtmrt1tpds5cj4fflzmm))/ViewPDF.asp https://prsindia.org/files/bills_acts/bills_parliament/2023/Jammu_and
x _Kashmir_Reorganisation_(Second_Amendment)_Bill_2023.pdf .
5 The Indian Penal Code, 1860, 14 The Jammu and Kashmir Reservation (Amendment) Act, 2023,
https://www.indiacode.nic.in/bitstream/123456789/2263/1/a https://egazette.gov.in/(S(qhylxpamjdu1qk4giekgb2lq))/ViewPDF.as
A1860-45.pdf px.
6 The Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973, 15 The Jammu and Kashmir Reservation Act, 2004,
https://www.indiacode.nic.in/bitstream/123456789/15272/1/the_code https://www.indiacode.nic.in/bitstream/123456789/16529/1/reservati
_of_criminal_procedure%2C_1973.pdf. on_act%2C_2004.pdf.
7 The Indian Evidence Act, 1872, 16 The Government of Union Territories Amendment Bill, 2023,
https://www.indiacode.nic.in/bitstream/123456789/15351/1/iea_1872 https://prsindia.org/files/bills_acts/bills_parliament/2023/Government
.pdf. _of_Union_Territories_(Amendment)_Bill_2023.pdf
8 Report No. 248, ‘The Bharatiya Nyaya Sanhita, 2023’, The 17 The Government of Union Territories Act, 1963,
Standing Committee on Home Affairs, Rajya Sabha, November 10, https://www.indiacode.nic.in/bitstream/123456789/1546/1/A1963-
2023, 20.pdf
https://prsindia.org/files/bills_acts/bills_parliament/2023/SC_Report_ 18 The Chief Election Commissioner And Other Election
Bharatiya_Nyaya_Sanhita_2023.pdf Commissioners (Appointment, Conditions Of Service And Term Of
9 Report No. 248, ‘The Bharatiya Nagrik Suraksha Sanhita, 2023’, Office) Bill, 2023,
The Standing Committee on Home Affairs, Rajya Sabha, November https://prsindia.org/files/bills_acts/bills_parliament/2023/Bill_Text_C
10, 2023, hief_Election_Commissioner_and_other_Election_Commissioners_B
https://prsindia.org/files/bills_acts/bills_parliament/2023/SC_Report_ ill_2023.pdf.
Bharatiya_Nagarik_Suraksha_Sanhita_2023.pdf
- 17-
Monthly Policy Review – December 2023 PRS Legislative Research
2023/consultation-paper-on-review-of-provisions-of-ncs-regulations-
and-lodr-regulations-for-ease-of-doing-business-and-introduction-of-
19 Amendments to the 2023 Bill,
fast-track-public-issuance-of-debt-securities_79762.html.
https://prsindia.org/files/bills_acts/bills_parliament/2023/Amendment
%20to%20CEC%20Bill%202023.pdf. 41 SEBI (Issue and Listing of Non-Convertible Securities)
Regulations, 2021, https://www.sebi.gov.in/legal/regulations/jul-
20 The Chief Election Commission (Conditions of Service of Election
2023/web-upload-of-the-securities-and-exchange-board-of-india-
Commissioners and Transaction of Business) Act, 1991,
issue-and-listing-of-non-convertible-securities-regulations-2021-last-
https://www.indiacode.nic.in/bitstream/123456789/1965/1/A1991-
amended-on-july-6-2023-_73664.html.
11.pdf.
42 SEBI (Listing Obligations and Disclosure Requirements)
21 The Repealing and Amending Bill 2022,
Regulations, 2015, https://www.sebi.gov.in/legal/regulations/oct-
http://164.100.47.4/BillsTexts/LSBillTexts/Asintroduced/290_2022_
2023/securities-and-exchange-board-of-india-listing-obligations-and-
LS_Eng1219202255443PM.pdf.
disclosure-requirements-regulations-2015-last-amended-on-october-
22 The Factoring Regulation Act, 2011,, 23-2023-_78921.html.
https://www.indiacode.nic.in/bitstream/123456789/2116/1/AA2012_
43 Draft Framework for Comments, Omnibus Framework for
_12.pdf.
recognising Self-Regulatory Organisations (SROs) for Regulated
23 The Advocates (Amendment) Bill, 2023, Entities (REs) of the Reserve Bank of India, Reserve Bank of India,
https://sansad.in/getFile/BillsTexts/RSBillTexts/PassedRajyaSabha/a December 21, 2023,
dvocate%20amend-E842023112014AM.pdf?source=legislation. https://rbidocs.rbi.org.in/rdocs/PublicationReport/Pdfs/DRAFTOMNI
24 The Advocates Act, 1961, BUSSRO7DD12CE1D89C423E9F62BC0422B08401.PDF.
https://www.indiacode.nic.in/bitstream/123456789/1631/1/A1961_25 44 RBI invites comments on the ‘Draft Omnibus Framework for
.pdf. recognising Self-Regulatory Organisations for its Regulated Entities’,
25 The Legal Practitioners Act, 1879, Reserve Bank of India, December 21, 2023,
https://lddashboard.legislative.gov.in/sites/default/files/A1879- https://rbidocs.rbi.org.in/rdocs/PressRelease/PDFs/PR1519OMNIBU
18.pdf. SSRO254DEA40598A429B98F2BFDB8314689B.PDF.
26 Writ Petition (Civil) No. 1099 of 2019, Supreme Court, December 45 Rationalisation of Licensing Framework for Authorised Persons
11, 2023, https://main.sci.gov.in/pdf/LU/article_370.pdf. (APs) under Foreign Exchange Management Act (FEMA), 1999,
27 Article 370, Constitution of India, Reserve Bank of India, December 26, 2023,
https://lddashboard.legislative.gov.in/sites/default/files/COI...pdf. https://rbidocs.rbi.org.in/rdocs/PressRelease/PDFs/PR1543FEMAB5
28 ‘Parliament approves Resolution to abrogate Article 370; paves 69920F99BC416A8CF2EC0CCD369521.PDF.
way to truly integrate J&K with Indian Union’, Press Information 46 Review of Authorisation Framework under FEMA, Reserve Bank
Bureau, August 6, 2019, of India, December 26, 2023,
https://pib.gov.in/pressreleaseshare.aspx?prid=1581391. https://rbidocs.rbi.org.in/rdocs/Content/PDFs/FEMALICENSINGFR
29 The Jammu and Kashmir Re-organisation Act, 2019, AMEWORK14AEB46A5EB84D6CA0CC9C93C4438774.PDF.
https://prsindia.org/files/bills_acts/bills_parliament/2019/Jammu%20 47 The Foreign Exchange Management Act, 1999,
and%20Kashmir%20Reorganisation%20Act,%202019.pdf. https://www.indiacode.nic.in/bitstream/123456789/1988/1/A1999_42
30 Report No. 140, “Appointment of Notaries”, Standing Committee .pdf.
on Personnel, Public Grievances, Law and Justice, December 11, 48 Money Changing Activities, Reserve Bank of India, as accessed on
2023, December 27, 2023,
https://sansad.in/getFile/rsnew/Committee_site/Committee_File/Repo https://www.rbi.org.in/commonperson/English/Scripts/FAQs.aspx?Id
rtFile/18/191/140_2023_12_15.pdf?source=rajyasabha. =24.
31 The Provisional Collection of Taxes Bill, 2023, 49 Consultation paper on ‘Introduction of optional T+0 and optional
https://sansad.in/getFile/BillsTexts/LSBillTexts/PassedLoksabha/158 Instant Settlement of Trades in addition to T+1 Settlement Cycle in
_C_2023_LS_Eng12202023101326AM.pdf?source=legislation. Indian Securities Markets', Securities and Exchange Board of India,
32 The Provisional Collection of Taxes Act, 1931, December 22, 2023, https://www.sebi.gov.in/reports-and-
https://www.indiacode.nic.in/bitstream/123456789/2392/1/A1931- statistics/reports/dec-2023/consultation-paper-on-introduction-of-
16.pdf. optional-t-0-and-optional-instant-settlement-of-trades-in-addition-to-
t-1-settlement-cycle-in-indian-securities-markets-_80204.html.
33 The Central Goods and Services Tax (Second Amendment) Bill,
2023, 50 The Telecommunications Bill, 2023,
https://sansad.in/getFile/BillsTexts/LSBillTexts/PassedLoksabha/159 https://egazette.gov.in/WriteReadData/2023/250880.pdf.
_C_2023_LS_Eng12202023101349AM.pdf?source=legislation. 51 The Indian Telegraph Act, 1885,
34 The Central Goods and Services Tax Act, 2017, https://www.indiacode.nic.in/bitstream/123456789/13115/1/indiantel
https://www.indiacode.nic.in/bitstream/123456789/15689/1/A2017- egraphact_1885.pdf.
12.pdf. 52 The Indian Wireless Telegraphy Act, 1933,
35 Resolution of the Monetary Policy Committee (MPC), Monetary https://www.indiacode.nic.in/bitstream/123456789/15410/1/the_india
Policy Statement, 2023-24, December 8, 2023, n_wireless_telegraphy_act%2C_1933.pdf.
https://rbidocs.rbi.org.in/rdocs/PressRelease/PDFs/PR1438ABAF9A 53 The Telecom Regulatory Authority of India Act, 1997,
A87F6345369F5B387E1749E0F7.PDF. https://www.indiacode.nic.in/bitstream/123456789/1929/1/AA1997_
36 Exposure Draft Product Regulations 2023, Insurance Regulatory _24tele.pdf.
and Development Authority of India, December 12, 2023, 54 The Press and Registration of Periodicals Bill, 2023,
https://irdai.gov.in/web/guest/document- https://sansad.in/getFile/BillsTexts/RSBillTexts/PassedRajyaSabha/P
detail?documentId=4243364. ress%20&%20registration-
37 Insurance Regulatory and Development Authority of India (Micro E842023111925AM.pdf?source=legislation.
Insurance) Regulations, 2015, https://irdai.gov.in/document- 55 The Press and Registration of Books Act, 1867,
detail?documentId=617801. https://www.indiacode.nic.in/bitstream/123456789/2272/3/AA1867-
38 Insurance Regulatory and Development Authority of India (Health 25.pdf.
Insurance) Regulations, 2016, https://irdai.gov.in/document- 56 The Post Office Bill, 2023, December 18, 2023,
detail?documentId=602887. https://sansad.in/getFile/BillsTexts/RSBillTexts/PassedRajyaSabha/E
39 Insurance Regulatory and Development Authority of India (Unit V%20Post%20Office%20Bill125202365314PM.pdf?source=legislati
Linked Insurance Products) Regulations, 2019, on.
https://irdai.gov.in/document-detail?documentId=604874. 57 The Indian Post Office Act, 1898, March 22, 1898,
40 Consultation paper on review of provisions of NCS Regulations https://www.indiacode.nic.in/bitstream/123456789/2329/1/A1898-
and LODR Regulations for ease of doing business and introduction 06.pdf
of fast track public issuance of debt securities, SEBI, December 9,
2023, https://www.sebi.gov.in/reports-and-statistics/reports/dec-
- 18-
Monthly Policy Review – December 2023 PRS Legislative Research
74 Report no. 23, Standing Committee on Petroleum and Natural Gas:
‘Review of Policy on Import of Crude Oil’, Lok Sabha, December
58 The Jan Vishwas (Amendment of Provisions) Act, 2023, Ministry
20, 2023,
of Commerce and Industry, August 11,
https://sansad.in/getFile/lsscommittee/Petroleum%20&%20Natural%
2023, https://sansad.in/getFile/BillsTexts/LSBillTexts/PassedBothHo
20Gas/17_Petroleum_And_Natural_Gas_23.pdf?source=loksabhadoc
uses/Jan%20vishwas818202331041PM.pdf?source=legislation .
s.
59 Central Universities Amendment Bill, 2023, 75 Scheme for engagement of Notified Private Exploration Agencies
https://prsindia.org/files/bills_acts/bills_parliament/2023/Central_uni
in Mineral Exploration directly through National Mineral Exploration
versities_(A)_bill,2023.pdf
Trust, Ministry of Mines, December 12, 2023,
60 ‘Research Based Education and Anusandhan Scenario in Sciences https://mines.gov.in/admin/storage/app/uploads/657aacdbd9b691702
and Related Fields’, Standing Committee on Education, Women, 538459.pdf.
Children, Youth and Sport, December 12, 2023, 76 The Mines and Minerals (Development and Regulation) Act, 1957,
https://sansad.in/getFile/rsnew/Committee_site/Committee_File/Repo
https://ibm.gov.in/writereaddata/files/07102014115602MMDR%20A
rtFile/16/189/358_2023_12_12.pdf?source=rajyasabha.
ct%201957_10052012.pdf.
61 Maritime Amrit Kaal Vision 2047, Ministry of Ports Shipping, and 77 Schedule of Charges for Projects Funded through National Mineral
Waterways, December 2023,
Exploration Trust, Ministry of Mines, March 31, 2020,
https://shipmin.gov.in/sites/default/files/Maritime%20Amrit%20Kaal
https://nmet.gov.in/upload/uploadfiles/files/Schedule-of-Charges-
%20Vision%202047%20%28MAKV%202047%29_compressed_0.p
(SoC)_NMET_Ministry-of-Mines.pdf.
df.
78 The Minerals (Other than Atomic and Hydro Carbons Energy
62 Report no. 151, Standing Committee on Health and Family
Mineral) Concession (Second Amendment) Rules, 2023, Ministry of
Welfare: ‘Implementation of Ayushman Bharat’, Rajya Sabha,
Mines, December 1, 2023,
December 19, 2023,
https://mines.gov.in/admin/storage/app/uploads/65698b88419221701
https://sansad.in/getFile/rsnew/Committee_site/Committee_File/Repo
415816.pdf.
rtFile/14/187/151_2023_12_19.pdf?source=rajyasabha
79 The Minerals (Other than Atomic and Hydro Carbons Energy
63 Report No. 324, Standing Committee on Industry: ‘Promotion of
Mineral) Concession Rules, 2016, Ministry of Mines, March 4, 2016,
Electric Vehicles in the Country’, Rajya Sabha, December 20, 2023,
https://ibm.gov.in/writereaddata/files/10202016094948MCR_2016_1
https://sansad.in/getFile/rsnew/Committee_site/Committee_File/Repo
8092016%20from%20SKS.pdf.
rtFile/17/190/324_2023_12_14.pdf?source=rajyasabha.
80 G.S.R. 737(E), ‘The Minerals (Other than Atomic and Hydro
64 Section 80 (EE)(B), Income Tax Act, 1961,
Carbons Energy Mineral) Concession (Amendment) Rules, 2023’,
https://incometaxindia.gov.in/pages/acts/income-tax-act.aspx.
The Gazette of India, Ministry of Mines, October 12, 2023,
65 Report No. 52, ‘National Policy on Child Labour – An https://mines.gov.in/admin/storage/app/uploads/652cc16a446b81697
Assessment’, Standing Committee on Labour Textiles and Skill 431914.pdf.
Development, Lok Sabha, December 20, 2023,
81 No. M. VI-1/7/2023-Mines VI, Ministry of Mines, December 26,
https://sansad.in/getFile/lsscommittee/Labour,%20Textiles%20and%
2023,
20Skill%20Development/17_Labour_Textiles_and_Skill_Developme
https://mines.gov.in/admin/storage/app/uploads/658a8594434501703
nt_52.pdf?source=loksabhadocs.
576980.pdf.
66 The National Capital Territory of Delhi Laws (Special Provisions)
82 The Offshore Areas Minerals (Development and Regulation) Act,
Second (Amendment) Bill, 2023,
2002,
https://prsindia.org/files/bills_acts/bills_parliament/2023/NCT_of_De
https://www.indiacode.nic.in/bitstream/123456789/2040/3/A2003-
lhi_Laws_(Special_Provisions)_Second_(Amendment)_Bill_2023.pd
17.pdf.
f
83 S.O. 5408 (E), Ministry of Environment, Forest and Climate
67 The National Capital Territory of Delhi Laws (Special Provisions)
Change, eGazette, December 21, 2023,
Second Act, 2011,
https://egazette.gov.in/WriteReadData/2023/250841.pdf.
https://lddashboard.legislative.gov.in/sites/default/files/A2011-
20_0.pdf 84 The Wild Life (Protection) Act, 1972, Ministry of Environment,
Forest and Climate Change,
68 “Cabinet Committee on Economic Affairs approves reservation
https://www.indiacode.nic.in/bitstream/123456789/1726/1/a1972-
norms for Jute Packaging Materials for Jute Year 2023-24 under JPM
53.pdf.
Act, 1987”, Cabinet Committee on Economic Affairs, Press
Information Bureau, December 8, 2023, 85 Report no. 37, Standing Committee on Food, Consumer Affairs
https://www.pib.gov.in/PressReleasePage.aspx?PRID=1984208. and Public Distribution: “Initiatives in the North East in the field of
Consumer Rights Protection”, December 19, 2023,
69 The Jute Packaging Materials (Compulsory Use In Packaging
https://sansad.in/getFile/lsscommittee/Consumer%20Affairs,%20Foo
Commodities) Act, 1987,
d%20and%20Public%20Distribution/17_Consumer_Affairs_Food_a
https://www.indiacode.nic.in/bitstream/123456789/1882/2/A1987-
nd_Public_Distribution_37.pdf?source=loksabhadocs.
10.pdf.
86 Report no. 38, Standing Committee on Consumer Affairs, Food
70 Report No. 46, ‘Insecticides and Pesticides – Promotion and
and Public Distribution: ‘Functioning of Warehousing Development
Development including Safe Usage: Licensing Regime for
and Regulatory Authority (WDRA)’, Lok Sabha, December 19,
Insecticides’, Standing Committee on Chemicals and Fertilizers, Lok
2023,
Sabha, December 19, 2023,
https://sansad.in/getFile/lsscommittee/Consumer%20Affairs,%20Foo
https://sansad.in/getFile/lsscommittee/Chemicals%20&%20Fertilizer
d%20and%20Public%20Distribution/17_Consumer_Affairs_Food_a
s/17_Chemicals_And_Fertilizers_46.pdf?source=loksabhadocs.
nd_Public_Distribution_38.pdf?source=loksabhadocs.
71 Report no. 42, Standing Committee on Defence: ‘A Review of the
87 CG-DL-E-09122023-250528, Central Motor Vehicles (Tenth
Working of the Defence Research and Development Organisation
Amendment) Rules, 2023,
(DRDO)’, Lok Sabha, December 20, 2023,
https://egazette.gov.in/(S(5ustc1n4azfrbln5bpo0q4fe))/ViewPDF.asp
https://sansad.in/getFile/lsscommittee/Defence/17_Defence_42.pdf?s
x.
ource=loksabhadocs.
88 The Central Motor Vehicles Rules, 1989,
72 Report No. 27, Standing Committee on External Affairs: ‘India’s
https://transport.mizoram.gov.in/uploads/attachments/214c153eea339
Engagement with G20 Countries’, Lok Sabha, December 20, 2023,
3c0981c3b1d6c5db394/cmvr-1989.pdf
https://sansad.in/getFile/lsscommittee/External%20Affairs/17_Extern
al_Affairs_27.pdf?source=loksabhadocs. 89 Motor Vehicles Act, 1988,
https://www.indiacode.nic.in/bitstream/123456789/9460/1/a1988-
73 26th Report: ‘India and Gulf Cooperation Council (GCC) –
59.pdf.
Contours of Cooperation’, Standing Committee on External Affairs,
December 12, 2023,
https://sansad.in/getFile/lsscommittee/External%20Affairs/17_Extern
al_Affairs_26.pdf?source=loksabhadocs.
- 19-
Monthly Policy Review – December 2023 PRS Legislative Research
DISCLAIMER: This document is being furnished to you for your
information. You may choose to reproduce or redistribute this
report for non-commercial purposes in part or in full to any other
person with due acknowledgement of PRS Legislative Research
(“PRS”). The opinions expressed herein are entirely those of the
author(s). PRS makes every effort to use reliable and
comprehensive information, but PRS does not represent that the
contents of the report are accurate or complete. PRS is an
independent, not-for-profit group. This document has been
prepared without regard to the objectives or opinions of those
who may receive it.
- 20-
