Monthly Policy Review
April 2025
Highlights of this Issue
Budget Session 2025 concludes (p. 2)
The Session was held from January 31 to April 4, 2025. Parliament passed ten Bills, including the Waqf
(Amendment) Bill, 2024, the Immigration and Foreigners Bill, 2024, and the Boilers Bill, 2024.
Parliament passed the Waqf (Amendment) Bill, 2024 (p. 4)
Only persons demonstrating that they have been practising Islam for at least five years can declare a waqf. The
Bill also includes non-Muslims in the composition of state waqf boards and the Central Waqf Council.
Supreme Court sets guidelines for Governor’s assent to state Bills (p. 2)
It held that after one round of withholding assent and repassing the Bill, the Governor cannot then reserve the
Bill for President’s consideration. It also prescribed timelines for Governors for assenting to Bills.
Repo rate cut from 6.25% to 6% (p. 2)
The standing deposit facility rate has been decreased from 6% to 5.75%. The MPC also decided to change its
stance from neutral to accommodative.
Cabinet approves caste count in the upcoming population census (p. 3)
The Union Cabinet has approved conducting a caste enumeration in the upcoming census.
UGC notified regulations for changes in higher education (p. 5)
The new regulations outline admission criteria, degree requirements, and allow for flexible programme
durations through accelerated and extended undergraduate degrees.
The Electronics Component Manufacturing Scheme notified (p. 5)
The scheme aims to develop domestic ecosystem for electronics component manufacturing. It will provide
incentives linked to domestic sales, support for capital expenditure, or both for specified component.
Environment (Construction and Demolition) Waste Management Rules notified (p. 6)
The new Rules set down the responsibilities of waste producers to recycle and reuse construction waste
including safe disposal of demolition waste and utilisation of processed and recycled waste.
May 1, 2025
PRS Legislative Research ◼ Institute for Policy Research Studies
3rd Floor, Gandharva Mahavidyalaya ◼ 212, Deen Dayal Upadhyaya Marg ◼ New Delhi – 110002
Tel: (011) 43434035-36, 23234801-02 ◼ www.prsindia.org
Monthly Policy Review – April 2025 PRS Legislative Research
Parliament prescribed the following timeline to be followed by
Governors while assenting to Bills:
Budget Session 2025 concludes ▪ A decision to withhold assent, or reserve the Bill
for the President’s consideration, on the aid and
Atri Prasad Rout (atri@prsindia.org)
advice of the Council of Ministers should be taken
The Budget Session of Parliament was held from within one month,
January 31 to April 4, 2025. ▪ A decision to withhold assent or reserve the Bill
for the President’s consideration, against the
During the session, five Bills were introduced, three of
advice of the Council of Ministers should be taken
which were passed. These are: (i) the Immigration and
within three months, and
Foreigners Bill, 2025, (ii) the Protection of Interests in
▪ If a Bill is passed again by the legislature after
Aircraft Objects Bill, 2025, and (iii) the Tribhuvan
assent was initially withheld, assent must be
Sahkari University Bill, 2025. The Income Tax Bill,
granted within one month.
2025 was introduced and referred to a Select
Committee of Lok Sabha. The judgement also prescribed a three-month time limit
for the President to take a decision on Bills referred to
Of the Bills pending from earlier sessions, seven were
her by the Governor. The Court held that some matters
passed. These include: (i) the Waqf (Amendment) Bill,
are subject to judicial review, including: (i) the
2024, (ii) the Disaster Management (Amendment) Bill,
Governor’s decision to reserve a Bill for the President
2024, and (iii) the Boilers Bill, 2024.
against the advice of the Council of Ministers, and (ii)
Parliament passed the Union budget and the Manipur the President’s decision to withhold assent to Bills
budget for 2025-26. The proclamation of President’s referred by the Governor.
Rule in Manipur was also approved by both Houses.
For more details on the legislative business taken up
during the session, please see here. For more details on
Macroeconomic Development
functioning of Parliament, please see here.
Tushar Chakrabarty (tushar@prsindia.org)
Supreme Court prescribes timelines for
Governor’s to assent to Bills Repo rate cut from 6.25% to 6%
Niranjana S Menon (niranjana@prsindia.org) The Reserve Bank of India’s Monetary Policy
Committee (MPC) cut the policy repo rate (the rate at
The Supreme Court set down guidelines for Governor’s which RBI lends money to banks) from 6.25% to 6%.1
assent to Bills passed by state legislatures. In October Other decisions of the MPC include:
2023, the Tamil Nadu government moved the Supreme
▪ The standing deposit facility rate (the rate at which
Court citing inaction by the Governor of Tamil Nadu in
RBI borrows from banks without giving collateral)
giving assent to Bills passed by the state legislature.
has been decreased from 6% to 5.75%.
The Governor had not taken any action on 12 Bills
passed by the state Assembly between January 2020 ▪ The marginal standing facility rate (the rate at
and April 2023. After the state government approached which banks can borrow additional money from
the Supreme Court, the Governor reserved two Bills for RBI) and the bank rate (rate at which RBI buys
the President’s consideration, and returned the bills of exchange) have both been reduced from
remaining Bills to the Assembly. In November 2023, 6.5% to 6.25%.
the state Assembly passed the 10 Bills again. The
The MPC also decided to change its stance from
Governor reserved all the repassed Bills for the
neutral to accommodative. The Committee’s decisions
President’s consideration.
are expected to keep inflation in line with the target of
The Supreme Court examined questions including: (i) 4% while supporting growth.
whether the Governor could reserve a Bill for the
President’s consideration after withholding assent the CPI inflation averaged 3.7% in the fourth
first time the Bill was passed, and (ii) whether there
quarter of 2024-25
was a constitutionally prescribed time-limit within
which the Governor is required to take action on Bills. Consumer Price Index (CPI) inflation was 3.7% in the
fourth quarter (January-March) of 2024-25, lower than
The Court set aside the reservation of 10 Bills enacted
5% in the corresponding quarter of 2023-24.2 In the
by the Tamil Nadu Legislature for the President. The
third quarter (October-December) of 2024-25, CPI
Bills will be deemed to have received assent in
inflation was 5.6%.
November 2023. It also held that if the Governor
withholds assent to a Bill, and it is repassed without Food inflation averaged 4.1% in the fourth quarter of
significant changes, the Governor cannot then reserve 2024-25, significantly lower than 8.5% in the fourth
the Bill for the President’s consideration. It also quarter of 2023-24. In the third quarter of 2024-25,
food inflation was 9.4%.
- 2 -
Monthly Policy Review – April 2025 PRS Legislative Research
Wholesale Price Index (WPI) inflation averaged 2.3% by Parliament.8 It consolidates the following Acts: (i)
in the fourth quarter of 2024-25, higher than 0.3% in the Passport (Entry into India) Act, 1920, (ii) the
the corresponding quarter of 2023-24.3 In the third Registration of Foreigners Act, 1939, (iii) the
quarter of 2024-25, WPI inflation was 2.5%. Foreigners Act, 1946, and (iv) the Immigration
(Carriers’ Liability) Act, 2000.
Figure 1: Monthly inflation in Q4 of 2024-25 (%
change, year-on-year) Key features of the Bill include:
7% ▪ Immigration: The 1920 Act empowers the central
6.0%
government to frame rules requiring persons
6%
entering India to possess passports.
5% 4.3% The Bill provides that persons entering or
4% 3.6% 3.3% 3.7% departing from India must also have a valid visa
2.5% (for foreigners) along with valid passports or other
2.7%
3% 2.4% valid travel documents. The Bill establishes the
2.0%
2% Bureau of Immigration for performing immigration
functions and other prescribed functions.
1%
Immigration functions include: (i) visa issuance
0% and regulation of entry into India, or (ii) transit,
CPI Food Inflation WPI stay and movement within and exit from India.
Jan-25 Feb-25 Mar-25 ▪ Registration of foreigners: The 1939 Act
empowers the central government to make rules
Sources: Ministry of Statistics and Programme Implementation; for foreigners to report their presence to a
Ministry of Commerce and Industry; PRS.
prescribed authority. The Bill provides that on
arrival in India, foreigners must register with a
Registration Officer.
Finance ▪ Obligations of persons/entities to provide
prescribed information: The 1946 Act requires
Tushar Chakrabarty (tushar@prsindia.org)
hotel keepers providing accommodation to
foreigners to furnish information. The Bill adds
Ministry of Finance notifies amalgamation of
that educational institutions must provide
26 regional rural banks prescribed information to the Registration Officer
on admitting foreigners. Further, medical
The Ministry of Finance notified the amalgamation of
institutions must provide information regarding
26 regional rural banks (RRBs) on the principle of
foreign patients availing indoor treatment or their
“One State, One RRB”.4 These banks raise deposits
attendants availing lodging facilities to the
primarily from rural/semi-urban areas and provide
Registration Officer.
loans to small and marginal farmers, agricultural
labourers, rural artisans, and other priority sectors.5 ▪ Carriers: The Bill amends the 2000 Act to
The amalgamation has been carried out across 10 states prohibit any transporter departing from India until
and one union territory. Post the amalgamation, the a clearance has been obtained from the
number of RRBs will reduce from 43 to 28, operating Immigration Officer.
in 26 states and 2 Union Territories.
For a PRS summary of the Bill, see here.
Cabinet approves second phase of Vibrant
Home Affairs Villages programme
Tushar Chakrabarty (tushar@prsindia.org)
Cabinet approves caste count in the next census
The Union Cabinet approved the Vibrant Villages
Shirin Pajnoo (shirin@prsindia.org)
Programme – II for implementation between 2024-25
and 2028-29.9 The programme will be implemented as
The Union Cabinet has approved including caste
a central sector scheme with an outlay of Rs 6,839
enumeration in the upcoming population census.6 The
crore. It will be implemented in select strategic
last decennial census was conducted in 2011.7
villages adjoining international land borders in states
including Arunachal Pradesh, Bihar, Gujarat, Jammu
Immigration and Foreigners Bill, 2025 passed
and Kashmir, Manipur, and Punjab. It aims to create
by Parliament
better living conditions and livelihood opportunities,
control trans-border crime, and assimilate border
Shirin Pajnoo (shirin@prsindia.org)
population with the nation. Funds will be provided for
A Bill introduced to consolidate laws regulating infrastructure, value chain development, education, and
immigration, entry, and stay of foreigners was passed development of tourism circuits.
- 3 -
Monthly Policy Review – April 2025 PRS Legislative Research
Minority Affairs Civil Aviation
Shirin Pajnoo (shirin@prsindia.org) Shrusti Singh (shrusti@prsindia.org)
Bill amending law regulating waqf property The Protection of Interests in Aircraft Objects
passed by Parliament Bill, 2025 passed by the Parliament
The Waqf (Amendment) Bill, 2024 was passed in The Parliament passed the Protection of Interests in
Parliament.10 It amends the Waqf Act, 1995.11 The Aircraft Objects Bill, 2025.12 The Bill aims to give
Act regulates waqf property in India. The Act defines legal effect to the following international agreements:
waqf as an endowment of movable or immovable (i) Convention on International Interests in Mobile
property for purposes considered pious, religious, or Equipment (also known as Cape Town Convention of
charitable under Muslim law. Every state is required to 2001), and (ii) Protocol to the Convention on
constitute a Waqf Board to manage waqf. Key features International Interests in Mobile Equipment on Matters
of the Bill as passed include: specific to Aircraft Equipment.13,14 India had acceded
to these in 2008. The Convention and Protocol aim to
▪ Formation of waqf: The Act allowed waqf to be
bring uniformity in securing rights for high-value assets
formed by: (i) declaration, (ii) recognition based on
such as aircrafts, helicopters, and engines in case of
long-term use (waqf by user), or (iii) endowment
default. Key features of the Bill include:
when the line of succession ends (waqf-alal-aulad).
The Act allowed for waqf creation by any person. ▪ Obligations of debtors: Debtors must submit
The Bill states that only persons showing that they records of dues to the Directorate General of Civil
have been practising Islam for at least five years Aviation (DGCA). A debtor is a person who has
may declare a waqf. The Bill removes waqf by taken an aviation asset under a lease or, conditional
user, which will apply prospectively. purchase agreement, or pledged an asset under a
security agreement.
▪ Government property as waqf: The Bill states
that any government property identified as waqf ▪ Remedies in case of default: The Convention
will cease to be waqf. Any officer above the rank gives creditors certain remedies in case of default
of a Collector and chosen by the state will by a debtor. The remedies include the right to take
determine ownership in case of uncertainty and back possession of the asset within a period of two
submit a report to the state government. calendar months or a mutually agreed upon period,
whichever is earlier. The Bill states that before
▪ Composition of the Central Waqf Council:
exercising any remedy, the creditor must notify
Under the Act, the Union Minister in-charge of
DGCA about the occurrence of default.
waqf is the ex-officio chairperson of the Council.
Members of the Council include Members of ▪ Detention of assets by government agencies:
Parliament, persons of national eminence, retired The following entities will have the right to detain
Supreme Court or High Court judges, and eminent an asset if dues for services related to that asset
scholars in Muslim law. The Act requires that all remain unpaid: (i) central government, (ii) any
Council members, barring the Minister, must be other entity providing public services in India, or
Muslims, and at least two must be women. The (iii) an inter-governmental organisation of which
Bill removes the requirement for the MPs, former India is a member.
judges, and eminent persons appointed to the
For a PRS summary of the Bill, see here.
Council to be Muslim. It further mandates that
two members must be non-Muslims.
▪ Composition of Waqf Boards: The Act provides
for election of up to two members each from Education
electoral colleges of a state’s Muslim: (i) MPs, (ii)
MLAs and MLCs, and (iii) Bar Council members,
Tribhuvan Sahkari University Bill, 2025 passed
to the Board. The Bill amends this to empower the
state government to nominate one person from Shrusti Singh (shrusti@prsindia.org)
each of the above groups to the Board. They need
The Tribhuvan Sahkari University Bill, 2025 was
not be Muslims. It adds that the Board must have:
passed by Parliament.15 The Bill establishes the
(i) two non-Muslim members, and (ii) at least one
Institute of Rural Management Anand, Gujarat (IRMA)
member each from Shias, Sunnis, and Backward
as the Tribhuvan Sahkari University. Currently, IRMA
classes of Muslims. The Act provides that at least
is registered as a society. The Bill places IRMA as a
two members must be women. The Bill mandates
school within the university. It also states that its
that two Muslim members be women.
autonomous identity will be preserved within the
For a PRS analysis of the Bill, see here. institutional framework of the University.
For a PRS Summary of the Bill, see here.
- 4 -
Monthly Policy Review – April 2025 PRS Legislative Research
UGC notifies regulations for changes in higher Agriculture
education
Shrusti Singh (shrusti@prsindia.org)
Vaishali Dhariwal (vaishali@prsindia.org)
Cabinet approves Fair and Remunerative Price
The University Grants Commission (UGC) has notified
of sugarcane for sugar season 2025-26
the UGC (Minimum Standards of Instruction for the
Grant of Undergraduate Degree and Postgraduate The Cabinet Committee on Economic Affairs approved
Degree) Regulations, 2025. These regulations the Fair and Remunerative Price (FRP) for sugarcane
introduce reforms in higher education programmes and for the sugar season 2025-26 (October-September) at
are in accordance with the National Education Policy Rs 355 per quintal for a basic recovery rate of
(NEP), 2020.16 The regulations have been issued under 10.25%.17 This is an increase of 4% over the FRP for
the University Grants Commission Act, 1956. Key the 2024-25 sugar season (Rs 340 per quintal). FRP is
changes include: the minimum price at which sugar mills can purchase
sugarcane from farmers.
▪ Admissions and programme duration: Higher
Education Institutions (HEIs) can admit students
twice a year, in July/August and January/February.
Undergraduate (UG) programmes may span three or
Irrigation
four years, while postgraduate (PG) programmes
can be of different durations, including: (i) a two- Shrusti Singh (shrusti@prsindia.org)
year programme with an exit option at the end of
first year, (ii) a one-year programme, and (iii) an Cabinet approves sub-scheme under PM Krishi
integrated five-year UG/PG programme. Students
Sinchayee Yojana
will be provided with multiple entry and exit
options during the academic programme. Students The Union Cabinet approved the Modernisation of
may also pursue two undergraduate or postgraduate Command Area Development and Water Management
degrees simultaneously. (M-CADWM) as a sub-scheme under PM Krishi
Sinchayee Yojana (PMKSY).18 The sub-scheme has
▪ Admission criteria: Students passing out from any
been launched with an initial outlay of Rs 1,600 crore
stream in Class 12 can apply to any UG discipline
for 2025-26. The scheme will target modernisation of
upon qualifying a national or university-level
irrigation water supply and micro-irrigation networks.
entrance exam. For being eligible to join PG
programmes, students must: (i) pass a three or four
year UG degree, and (ii) qualify the national or
university-level exam, irrespective of discipline. Electronics & IT
▪ Degree requirements: To earn a major in a
saket@prsindia.org
specific discipline at the UG level, students must
complete at least 50% of their total credits in that
The Electronics Component Manufacturing
discipline. The remaining credits can be earned
Scheme notified
through skill-based courses or applied learning
components. Students exiting the degree after
The Ministry of Electronics and Information
completing a certain level and gaining required
Technology notified the Electronics Component
credits are eligible to receive a UG Manufacturing Scheme.19 The scheme provides
certificate/diploma.
incentives for domestic manufacturing of components.
▪ Recognition of prior learning: This process The total expected outlay under the scheme is Rs
assesses and validates the students’ prior skills 22,919 crore over a period of six years. Key features of
acquired through non-formal sources. Such the scheme are as follows:
students will be assessed by recognised HEIs.
▪ Components to be incentivised: Table 1 lists the
▪ Accelerated and extended degrees: HEIs can now components to be incentivised under the scheme.
offer Accelerated Degree Programmes (ADP) for The incentive will be provided to selected projects
quicker completion of the credits, and Extended as a percentage of incremental domestic sales,
Degree Programmes (EDP) for students needing capital expenditure, or both, depending on the
additional time. These are applicable for category. Sales-linked incentive will be available
undergraduate degrees. for a period of six years.
- 5 -
Monthly Policy Review – April 2025 PRS Legislative Research
Table 1: Target segments under the scheme ▪ Remittances from NRIs: The Committee
Segment Incentive observed that inward remittances from NRIs are
the second largest source of external financing
Camera and display modules, 4%-10% of the net
after service exports. In 2023-24 remittances from
and bare components such as incremental domestic sales
NRIs were around USD 119 billion. The
sensors, lithium-ion cells, in the first year; gradually
microphones, speakers, and reduces to 1%-5% in the Committee recommended: (i) streamlining online
enclosures for devices sixth year transfer platforms, (ii) reducing transaction fees,
(iii) addressing taxation concerns, and (iv)
Certain circuit boards and 5%-8% of the net
promoting other investment options available to
related sub-components incremental domestic sales
in the first year; gradually NRIs in India, such as mutual funds, stocks, and
reduces to 3%-4% in the real estate.
sixth year; also eligible for
▪ Reintegration of deportees and returned
incentive worth 25% of
capital expenditure migrants: The Committee observed that state
governments are responsible for the reintegration
Parts and sub-components for 25% of capital expenditure
of returned Indian deportees. It also noted the
manufacturing of above
absence of a national policy on reintegration of
segments; capital equipment
for manufacturing migrant returnees. The Committee recommended
the Centre to implement reintegration programmes
Source: F. No. W/49/2024-IPHW, Ministry of Electronics and
Information Technology, April 8, 2025; PRS. for returned deportees. It also recommended
framing a reintegration policy for returned
▪ Eligibility criteria: Existing as well as new
migrants with shared responsibilities between
manufacturing units will be eligible under the
Centre and states.
scheme. Companies must meet minimum annual
threshold for investment, incremental sales, and ▪ Emigration Bill: The Committee observed delays
employment to receive incentives. in finalising the Emigration Bill, 2024. The
proposed Bill seeks to establish a comprehensive
▪ Selection process: A project management agency
emigration management framework. The
will be constituted to scrutinise applications and
Committee recommended prioritising the Bill and
prepare appraisal reports. An inter-ministerial
setting timelines for presenting it in Parliament.
governing council will be set up to review the
applications and recommend their approval. The For a PRS summary of the report, see here.
Secretary of the Ministry will chair the council. It
will have representatives from NITI Aayog and
specified departments such as Expenditure,
Economic Affairs, Heavy Industries, and Telecom. Environment
Vaishali Dhariwal (vaishali@prsindia.org)
External Affairs Environment (Construction and Demolition)
Waste Management Rules, 2025 notified
Shirin Pajnoo (shirin@prsindia.org)
The Ministry of Environment, Forest and Climate
Standing Committee report on welfare of Change notified the Environment (Construction and
Demolition) Waste Management Rules, 2025 under the
Indian diaspora and status of Emigration Bill
Environment (Protection) Act, 1986.21 These Rules
The Standing Committee on External Affairs (Chair: replace the Construction and Demolition Waste
Dr. Shashi Tharoor) presented its report on ‘Indian Management Rules, 2016 and aim to ensure responsible
Diaspora Overseas: All Aspects of their Conditions and management, recycling, and reuse of construction and
Welfare, including the Status of the Emigration Bill’.20 demolition (C&D) waste generated from building
Indian diaspora refers to people whose origins can be activities.
traced to India or are Indian citizens who have settled
Key features include:
abroad. Key observations and recommendations of the
Committee include: ▪ Extended Producer Responsibility (EPR): Each
producer will be responsible for the safe disposal
▪ Policy for diaspora: The Committee observed
and management of the construction and
that there is no single policy document for the
demolition (C&D) waste generated. This would
diaspora. It further noted that the lack of a clear
include recycling and reuse of waste in future
policy impacts the country’s ability to adequately
projects, with EPR targets enforced annually. A
address the diaspora’s issues. The Committee
producer is defined as a registered waste generator
recommended that the Ministry draft a policy
undertaking large-scale building projects with a
which would serve as a guiding principle for
built-up area of 20,000 square meters or more.
deeper engagement with the community.
- 6 -
Monthly Policy Review – April 2025 PRS Legislative Research
▪ EPR Certificates: Producers can meet their EPR Communications
obligations by purchasing EPR certificates issued
by registered recyclers. The Central Pollution saket@prsindia.org
Control Board (CPCB) will generate and regulate
these certificates. C&D waste disposed of and TRAI releases recommendations on
recycled in-situ (on site) will receive higher credit designating critical services in machine-to-
weightage than waste managed ex-situ (off site). machine communication
▪ Recycling Targets: From 2026-27 onwards, at TRAI released recommendations on the issues related
least 5% of materials used in construction and to critical services in the machine-to-machine
reconstruction activities must be derived from communication sector (M2M), and transfer of
recycled C&D waste. This target will increase ownership of M2M SIMs.24 M2M refers to use of
progressively to 25% in 2030-31. Failure to meet telecom services to enable direct communication
these targets will result in the payment of an between electronic devices, usually through SIM cards
environmental compensation. Unmet targets will installed in the devices themselves. TRAI noted that
roll over for up to three years but will not be M2M communication will increasingly be used to
waived off by payment of compensation. deliver services of critical importance such as health
and transport. For such critical services, higher
▪ Utilisation of Processed Waste: All construction
reliability of communication will be essential.
projects with a built-up area of 20,000 square
meters or more, as well as road construction TRAI recommended that a service should be classified
projects, are required to utilise processed/recycled as critical if it passes following tests: (i) whether the
C&D waste materials. The assessment of the waste service demands ultra-reliable and low-delay
to be utilised will be determined as a percentage of connectivity with very high availability, and (ii)
debris derived waste from construction activity whether any disruption in connectivity will have an
ranging between 5% and 25% of the total adverse impact on national security, economy, public
construction material required. health, or public safety. It further recommended that
instead of classifying an entire domain or sector as
Ministry issued draft Greenhouse Gases critical, specific applications should be classified as
Emission Intensity Target Rules, 2025 critical. This classification should be carried out by
respective ministry or regulatory body in consultation
The Ministry of Environment, Forest and Climate
with the Department of Telecommunications (DoT).
Change issued draft Greenhouse Gases Emission
Such classification should be technology-agnostic.
Intensity Target (GEI) Rules, 2025, specifying
greenhouse gases emission intensity targets for the Other key recommendations include: (i) entities
obligated entities.22 These rules are issued under providing critical services should be allowed to enter
Carbon Credit Trading Scheme, 2023.23 Rules specify service-level agreement with telecom service providers,
the companies which will be obligated to meet these and service performance parameters should be enforced
targets and include sectors such as cement, chemicals, through these agreements, (ii) the devices deployed in
metals, and paper. critical services should be subject to mandatory testing
and certification in a phased manner, and (iii) DoT
The GEI targets will be calculated as per a prescribed
should establish a framework for transfer of M2M
method published by the Bureau of Energy Efficiency.
service authorisation, as well as M2M SIMs.
Entities shall be obligated to meet the GEI targets by
the respective compliance years as stated the Schedule
of the Rules. The entity will be liable to pay an
Environmental Compensation if it fails to achieve its
mandated GEI target. This compensation will be equal
to or twice the average price of the carbon credit
certificate traded in the respective compliance year.
This compensation shall be paid within 90 days of its
imposition. In addition, the funds collected will be
used for the carbon credit trading scheme.
1 Resolution of the Monetary Policy Committee April 7 to 9, 2025, 2 “Consumer Price Index Numbers on Base 2012=100 for Rural,
Monetary Policy Statement 2025-26, Reserve Bank of India, April 9, Urban and Combined for the Month of March, 2025”, Press
2025, Information Bureau, Ministry of Statistics and Programme
https://rbidocs.rbi.org.in/rdocs/PressRelease/PDFs/PR61C1724B25D Implementation, April 15, 2025,
B7646DFB49022F184DF3766.PDF. https://pib.gov.in/PressReleasePage.aspx?PRID=2121843.
- 7 -
Monthly Policy Review – April 2025 PRS Legislative Research
https://www.ugc.gov.in/pdfnews/0920543_Public-Notice-UG-and-
PG-Regulations-2025.pdf.
3 “Index Numbers of Wholesale Price in India for the Month of
17 “Cabinet approves Fair and Remunerative Price of sugarcane
March, 2025 (Base Year: 2011-12)”, Press Information Bureau,
payable by sugar mills to sugarcane farmers for sugar season 2025-
Ministry of Commerce and Industry, April 15, 2025,
26”, Press Information Bureau, Cabinet Committee on Economic
https://pib.gov.in/PressReleasePage.aspx?PRID=2121751.
Affairs, April 30, 2025,
4 “Department of Financial Services notifies amalgamation of 26 https://pib.gov.in/PressReleasePage.aspx?PRID=2125471.
RRBs in fourth phase of amalgamation”, Press Information Bureau, 18 “Cabinet approves Modernisation of Command Area Development
Ministry of Finance, April 8, 2025, and Water Management as a sub-scheme of Pradhan Mantri Krishi
https://pib.gov.in/PressReleasePage.aspx?PRID=2120016. Sinchayee Yojana for the period 2025-26”, Press Information
5 Overview, Regional Rural Banks, Bureau, Cabinet, April 9, 2025,
https://www.nabard.org/auth/writereaddata/File/RRBs.pdf. https://pib.gov.in/PressReleasePage.aspx?PRID=2120360.
6 “Cabinet approves Caste enumeration in the upcoming Census”, 19 F. No. W/49/2024-IPHW, Ministry of Electronics and Information
Press Release, Press Information Bureau, Cabinet, April 30, 2025, Technology, April 8, 2025,
https://pib.gov.in/PressReleasePage.aspx?PRID=2125526. https://www.meity.gov.in/static/uploads/2025/04/e31d6fbd4044f8794
7 Census Division, Census India, Ministry of Home Affairs, as f58157ba685e1ad.pdf.
accessed on May 1, 2025, 20 Report No. 6: Indian Diaspora Overseas including NRIs, PIOs,
https://censusindia.gov.in/census.website/node/378. OCIs and Migrant Workers: All Aspects of their Conditions and
8 The Immigration and Foreigners Bill, 2025, Welfare, including the Status of the Emigration Bill, Standing
https://prsindia.org/files/bills_acts/bills_parliament/2025/Immigration Committee on External Affairs, April 1, 2025,
_and_Foreigners_Bill_2025.pdf. https://sansad.in/getFile/lsscommittee/External%20Affairs/18_Extern
9 “Cabinet approves “Vibrant Villages Programme-II (VVP-II) for al_Affairs_6.pdf?source=loksabhadocs.
21 Environment (Construction and Demolition) Waste Management
financial years 2024-25 to 2028-29”, Press Information Bureau,
Rules, 2025
Ministry of Home Affairs, April 4, 2025,
https://egazette.gov.in/WriteReadData/2025/262313.pdf.
https://pib.gov.in/PressReleasePage.aspx?PRID=2118731.
22 Notification of the Ministry of Environment, Forest and Climate
10 Waqf Amendment Bill, 2024,
Change, April 16, 2025,
https://sansad.in/getFile/BillsTexts/LSBillTexts/PassedBothHouses/T
https://egazette.gov.in/WriteReadData/2025/262568.pdf.
HE%20WAQF%20(AMENDMENT)%20BILL,%202025411202521
23 Carbon Credit Trading Scheme, 2023, Ministry of Power, June 28,
212PM.pdf?source=legislation.
2023, https://egazette.gov.in/WriteReadData/2023/246859.pdf.
11 Waqf Act, 1995,
24 “TRAI releases recommendations on the issues Related to Critical
https://prsindia.org/files/bills_acts/bills_parliament/2024/Mussalman
Services in the M2M Sector, and Transfer of Ownership of M2M
_Wakf_(Repeal)_Bill_2024.pdf.
SIMs”, Telecom Regulatory Authority of India, April 22, 2025,
12 The Protection of Interests in Aircraft Objects Bill, 2025, https://trai.gov.in/sites/default/files/2025-
https://prsindia.org/files/bills_acts/bills_parliament/2025/Protection_ 04/Final_Reco_on_critical_M2M_services_22.04.2025_1250_0.pdf.
of_Interests_in_Aircraft_Objects_Bill_2025.pdf.
13 Convention on International Interests in Mobile Equipment, 2001, DISCLAIMER: This document is being furnished to you for your
https://www.icao.int/sustainability/Documents/CPTConvention_Ann information. You may choose to reproduce or redistribute this
exA.pdf. report for non-commercial purposes in part or in full to any other
person with due acknowledgement of PRS Legislative Research
14 Protocol to the Convention on International Interests in Mobile
(“PRS”). The opinions expressed herein are entirely those of the
Equipment on Matters specific to Aircraft Equipment, 2001,
author(s). PRS makes every effort to use reliable and
https://www.icao.int/sustainability/Documents/CPTConvention_Prot
comprehensive information, but PRS does not represent that the
ocol_AnnexB.pdf.
contents of the report are accurate or complete. PRS is an
15 The Tribhuvan Sahkari University Bill, 2025, independent, not-for-profit group. This document has been
https://prsindia.org/files/bills_acts/bills_parliament/2025/Tribhuvan_ prepared without regard to the objectives or opinions of those
Sahkari_University_Bill,_2025.pdf. who may receive it.
16 UGC (Minimum Standards of Instruction for the Grant of
Undergraduate Degree and Postgraduate Degree) Regulations, 2025,
University Grants Council, April 2024
- 8 -
