Monthly Policy Review
October 2024
Highlights of this Issue
Consumer Price Index inflation was 4.2% in the second quarter of 2024-25 (p. 2)
CPI inflation was lower than the same quarter last year (6.4%). Food inflation averaged 6.8% in the second
quarter of 2024-25, with a steep rise in the month of September (9.2%) as compared to August (5.7%).
Supreme Court upholds law on citizenship for migrants from Bangladesh to Assam (p. 3)
The Court held that a separate provision for Assam was grounded in reasonable classification. It also held that
cut-off dates in the Act are based on historical circumstances, and are thus, not arbitrary.
Supreme Court upholds states’ right to regulate Industrial Alcohol (p. 3)
The Supreme Court held that intoxicating liquor may also include alcohol other than potable alcohol. It also
held that Parliament cannot enact a law to take control of the industry of intoxicating liquor.
Ministry of Corporate Affairs releases Guidelines for PM Internship Scheme (p. 2)
The Guidelines for the Pilot project specifies the criterion for companies, duration of the internship, eligibility
for the internship, benefits to the interns, and the use of CSR funds by the companies.
Sports Ministry releases draft Bill on sports governance (p. 4)
The draft Bill establishes the Sports Regulatory Body of India. The Board will grant recognition to the National
Olympic Committee, National Paralympic Committee and National Sports Federations of various sports.
Cabinet approves rationalisation of existing agricultural schemes (p. 3)
The Union Cabinet approved the rationalisation of all centrally-sponsored schemes under the Ministry of
Agriculture and Farmers Welfare into two umbrella schemes.
Cabinet approves continuation of supply of free fortified rice (p. 4)
Free supply of fortified rice under all welfare schemes will continue until December 2028.
Cabinet approves Rs 1,000 crore funding for space-based startups (p. 5)
This fund would be deployed over a five-year period starting in 2025-26 and aims to benefit close to 40 space-
based startups.
Environment Ministry invites comments on draft Liquid Waste Management Rules (p. 5)
These rules related to environmentally sound management of wastewater, faecal sludge, and utilisation of
treated wastewater.
National Electricity Plan (Transmission) notified for 2022-32 (p. 5)
As per the National Electricity Plan, 1.91 lakh circuit kilometre transmission lines are planned to be added in
2022-32.
November 1, 2024
PRS Legislative Research ◼ Institute for Policy Research Studies
3rd Floor, Gandharva Mahavidyalaya ◼ 212, Deen Dayal Upadhyaya Marg ◼ New Delhi – 110002
Tel: (011) 43434035-36, 23234801-02 ◼ www.prsindia.org
Monthly Policy Review – October 2024 PRS Legislative Research
Macroeconomic Development Corporate Affairs
Tushar Chakrabarty (tushar@prsindia.org) Tushar Chakrabarty (tushar@prsindia.org)
Consumer Price Index inflation was 4.2% in Guidelines released for pilot of Prime
the second quarter of 2024-25 Minister’s internship scheme
Consumer Price Index (CPI) inflation was 4.2% in the The Ministry of Corporate Affairs released the
second quarter (July-September) of 2024-25, lower than guidelines for the Prime Minister’s Internship Scheme
6.4% in the same quarter last year.1 In the first quarter – Pilot Project.4 The scheme was announced in the
(April-June) of 2024-25, CPI inflation was 4.9%. Budget for 2024-25 and aims to provide internships to
one crore youth in five years. A pilot project of the
Food inflation averaged 6.8% in the second quarter of
scheme has been launched for 2024-25 with a target of
2024-25. This was lower as compared to food inflation
providing 1.25 lakh internships. Key features of the
of 9.4% in the corresponding quarter of 2023-24. In
guidelines include:
the first quarter of 2024-25, food inflation was 8.9%.
▪ Criteria for companies: For offering internships,
Wholesale Price Index (WPI) inflation was 1.8% in the
top 500 companies have been selected based on
second quarter of 2024-25, higher than the same
their average expenditure on corporate social
quarter last year (-0.6%).2 In the first quarter of 2024-
responsibility (CSR) over last three years. Other
25, WPI inflation averaged 2.5%.
companies can participate under the scheme with
Figure 1: Monthly inflation in Q1 of 2024-25 (% approval from the Ministry.
change, year-on-year)
▪ Duration: The internship duration must be for 12
10% 9.2% months. At least half of this must be spent in
9% actual working experience/job environment.
8%
▪ Eligibility for internship: Candidates aged
7%
between 21 and 24 years will be eligible to get
6% 5.5% 5.4% 5.7%
internships. They should not be employed full-
5% time or engaged in full-time education. However,
4% 3.6%3.7% candidates enrolled in online/distance learning
3% 2.1% programmes are eligible to apply. Other ineligible
1.8%
2% 1.3% candidates include: (i) graduates from institutions
1% such as IITs, IIMs, and National Law Universities,
0% (ii) those with professional qualifications or a
CPI Food Inflation WPI master’s degree, and (iii) those belonging to
families with annual income exceeding eight lakh
Jul-24 Aug-24 Sep-24 rupees in 2023-24.
Sources: MoSPI; Ministry of Commerce and Industry; PRS. ▪ Benefits to interns: Interns will be paid monthly
assistance of Rs 5,000. The company will release
Repo rate kept unchanged at 6.5% Rs 500 each month to the intern from their CSR
funds. Following this, the central government will
The Monetary Policy Committee (MPC) of the Reserve
pay the remaining Rs 4,500 to the candidate.
Bank of India kept the policy repo rate (the rate at
Interns will also receive a one-time grant of Rs
which RBI lends money to banks) unchanged at 6.5%.3
6,000 from the central government on joining the
Other decisions of the Committee include:
internship location.
▪ The standing deposit facility rate (the rate at which
▪ Use of CSR funds: Companies will bear the cost
RBI borrows from banks without giving collateral)
of training the interns from their CSR funds.
has been retained at 6.25%.
Further, up to 5% of CSR expenditure incurred
▪ The marginal standing facility rate (the rate at under the scheme may be classified as
which banks can borrow additional money from administrative costs by the company.
RBI) and the bank rate (rate at which RBI buys
bills of exchange) have been retained at 6.75%.
The MPC decided to change their stance to neutral
from its earlier disinflationary stance. It also decided to
remain focused on keeping inflation in line with target
of 4% while supporting growth.
- 2 -
Monthly Policy Review – October 2024 PRS Legislative Research
Law and Justice regulate intoxicating liquors from the stage of raw
materials to its consumption. It further held that
Rutvik Upadhyaya (rutvik@prsindia.org) Parliament cannot enact a law to take control of the
industry of intoxicating liquor. Doing so would lead to
SC upholds provision on citizenship for states losing their exclusive legislative competence to
migrants from Bangladesh to Assam regulate such industry.
With a 4:1 majority, the Supreme Court upheld Another question the Court examined was whether
provision of the Citizenship Act, 1955 providing a intoxicating liquors include alcohol other than potable
separate citizenship criterion for migrants from alcohol. It held that intoxicating liquors under Entry 8
Bangladesh to Assam.5,6 According to this provision, of List II covers all alcohol that could be used
any person of Indian origin who: (i) entered Assam noxiously to the detriment of public health. This
from Bangladesh before January 1, 1966, and (ii) has includes rectified spirits and industrial spirits (not fit
been ordinarily residing in Assam since, is an Indian for human consumption) used in the production of
citizen. However, persons who migrated after January potable alcohol and other products.
1, 1966 and before March 25, 1971 will be conferred
citizenship on completing 10 years from the date of
detection as a foreigner. Upon registration, he will be
deemed an Indian citizen but his name will be deleted Agriculture
from the electoral roll for 10 years.
Shrusti Singh (shrusti@prsindia.org)
Some of the key questions that the Supreme Court
examined include whether: (i) Parliament has
Cabinet approves rationalisation of schemes for
competence to pass such legislation, (ii) separate
sustainable agriculture and food security
provision for Assam violates Article 14 of the
constitution, and (iii) cut-off dates under the provision The Union Cabinet approved the rationalisation of all
are arbitrary. existing centrally sponsored schemes under the Ministry
of Agriculture and Farmers Welfare into two umbrella
The Court ruled that Parliament has competence to pass
schemes: (i) Pradhan Mantri Rashtriya Krishi Vikas
any law on citizenship. This competence extends to
Yojana (PM-RKVY), and (i) Krishonnati Yojana.10
legislating the provision in question.
The Court also ruled that a separate provision under the The PM-RKVY will be implemented with an outlay of
Act for Assam does not violate the right to equality Rs 57,075 crore to promote sustainable agriculture.
(Article 14).7 Assam and the rest of India are Some of the schemes under PM-RKVY include: (i) Soil
distinguishable on the basis of the unique political Health Management, (ii) Rainfed Area Development,
situation created in Assam by the influx of migrants. (iii) Agro Forestry, and (iv) Agricultural
The Court also added that the cut-off dates under this Mechanisation. State governments will have the
provision are not arbitrary as they are based on specific flexibility to reallocate funds from one component to
historical events and circumstances. another as per their requirements.
The Krishonnati Yojana will be targeted at achieving
food security for self-sufficiency with a proposed
outlay of Rs 44,247 crore.
Trade and Commerce
Cabinet approves mission for oilseeds
Shrusti Singh (shrusti@prsindia.org)
production
Supreme Court upholds states’ right to
The Union Cabinet approved the National Mission on
regulate industrial alcohol Edible Oils – Oilseeds (NMEO-Oilseeds).11 The
Mission will be implemented with a proposed
The Supreme Court in a nine-judge bench judgement
allocation of Rs 10,103 crore between 2024-25 to
reversed an earlier seven-judge bench judgement, and
2030-31. The mission aims to increase production of
upheld states’ right to regulate denatured spirit or
primary oilseed crops from 39 million tonne in 2022-23
industrial alcohol.8 Under List II of the Seventh
to 70 million tonne by 2030-31. These include
Schedule of the Constitution, states are empowered to
Rapeseed-Mustard, Groundnut, Soybean, Sunflower,
regulate the production, manufacture, possession,
and Sesamum. Domestic edible oil production in 2023-
transport, purchase, and sale of intoxicating liquors.9
24 is estimated to be 12 million tonne.12 Along with
The Court was reviewing the division of power NMEO – Oil Palm, this mission targets to increase
between the Union and states with respect to regulation domestic edible oil production to 25 million tonne by
and taxation of various types of alcohol. The Court 2030-31. This estimated increase in domestic
examined whether the Union’s control of industries in production is expected to cover 72% of India’s
public interest (Entry 52 of List I) overrides states’ projected requirement by 2030-31. 65 new seed hubs
right to regulate intoxicating liquors (Entry 8 of List II). and 50 seed storage units will be setup in the public
The Court held that the Constitution empowers states to sector to improve seed production infrastructure.
- 3 -
Monthly Policy Review – October 2024 PRS Legislative Research
Minimum Support Prices for Rabi Crops ▪ Suspension: Recognition of the NOC, NPC,
approved and NSFs is conditional on their affiliation with:
(i) the International Olympic or Paralympic
The Cabinet Committee on Economic Affairs
Committee (for NOC and NPC) or, (ii) the
approved an increase in the minimum support prices
concerned International Federation (for NSFs).
(MSP) for all mandated Rabi crops for the marketing
Failure to maintain affiliation can lead to
season 2025-26 (see Table 1).13 MSP refers to the
suspension. Other reasons for suspension
assured price at which crops are procured from farmers
include: (i) reported irregularities in internal
by the central government.14 MSP for wheat has
functioning, (ii) failure to publish accounts, and
increased by 6.6%. The highest increase in MSP has
(iii) irregularities in election procedures. If the
been announced for Barley (7%).
reason for suspension is rectifiable, the Board
Table 1: Minimum Support Prices for rabi crops for can ensure compliance instead.
Marketing Season 2025-26
▪ Governance: The draft Bill provides certain
Crops MSP MSP % change specifications in the governance structure of the
2024-25 2025-26
NOC, NPC and each NSF. These bodies must
Wheat 2,275 2,425 6.6% each have a General Body and Executive
Barley 1,850 1,980 7.0% Committee. The Executive Committee, which is
Gram 5,440 5,650 3.9% a governing body, will be elected by the Athlete
Lentil (Masur) 6,425 6,700 4.3% Commission. It will consist of office bearers such
as President, Vice-Presidents, and Joint
Rapeseed and 5,650 5,950 5.3%
Mustard Secretaries. It will also comprise of athletes.
After serving for more than two consecutive
Safflower 5,800 5,940 2.4%
terms, office bearers would be ineligible to
Sources: Press Information Bureau; PRS.
contest election for at least four years.
Cabinet approves continuation of supply of free
▪ At least 10% of the General Body and voting
fortified rice under PMGKAY members in each body will comprise of
Sportspersons of Outstanding Merit (SOM).
The Union Cabinet approved the continuation of supply
These are retired athletes who have won at least
of free fortified rice under all welfare schemes
one medal at the Olympics, Commonwealth or
including the Pradhan Mantri Garib Kalyan Anna
Asian Games.
Yojana.15 The free supply has been extended from July
2024 to December 2028. Rice fortification involves ▪ Tribunal: The draft Bill sets up an Appellate
adding rice kernels enriched with micronutrients to Sports Tribunal. The central government will
regular rice. It will be implemented as a central sector notify the composition, manner of selection of
scheme funded by the Union government. members, and matters over which the Tribunal can
exercise jurisdiction. Selection of the Tribunal
will made on recommendations of a committee
headed by a retired judge of the Supreme Court or
Youth Affairs and Sports High Court.
Rutvik Upadhyaya (rutvik@prsindia.org)
Sports Ministry releases draft Bill on sports Health
governance
Shirin Pajnoo (shirin@prsindia.org)
The Ministry of Youth Affairs and Sports released the
Draft National Sports Governance Bill, 2024.16 The
Health Ministry expands scope of nutrition
Bill creates a regulatory structure for the recognition
support for Tuberculosis Patients
and regulation of: (i) the National Olympic Committee
(NOC), (ii) the National Paralympic Committee (NPC) The Health Ministry recently announced the expansion
and (iii) National Sports Federations (NSFs). Key of the Ni-kshay Poshan Yojana.17 This scheme aims to
features of the draft Bill include: provide nutritional and financial support to TB patients
to reduce mortality due to TB.
▪ Regulator: The draft Bill provides for the
creation of the Sports Regulatory Board of India. Financial support for each TB patient will be increased
The Board will responsible for regulating the from Rs 500 to Rs 1,000 per month. The scheme will
NOC, NPC, and NSFs of various sports. It will also provide energy-dense nutritional supplements to
be empowered to grant, renew, or suspend underweight TB patients for the first two months of
recognition of these bodies. The Board will treatment. Family members of TB patients will also
protect the rights and ensure the welfare of receive nutritional support which will be aimed at
athletes and support personnel. improving their immunity.
- 4 -
Monthly Policy Review – October 2024 PRS Legislative Research
Cost of expanding the scheme is estimated at Rs 1,040 reuse of treated wastewater. Users who are not
crore. This will be distributed between the centre and able to setup an onsite facility can purchase EUR
states in a 60:40 ratio. certificates from registered wastewater treatment
facilities. The state pollution control board will
authorise these EUR certificates.
▪ Responsibilities of industries: Industries with
Science and Technology
water consumption of more than 5,000 litres per
day or pollution load of more than 10 kg per day in
Anirudh TR (anirudh@prsindia.org)
term of BOD will have to register on the online
portal. They will have to: (i) comply with effluent
Cabinet approves Rs 1,000 crore funding for
discharge standards set by the Central and State
space-based startups
Pollution Control Boards, and (ii) maintain
The Union Cabinet approved setting up of Rs 1,000 facilities to treat industrial effluent. Industries
crore venture capital fund to support space-based such as thermal power plants, steel and textiles will
startups.18 This fund is being set up by the Indian have to meet obligation for minimum reuse of
National Space Promotion and Authorisation Centre treated wastewater.
(INSPACe). INSPACe was created by the government
▪ Management of faecal waste: Users of onsite
in 2020 to promote and oversee private sector
sanitation facilities such as septic tanks will be
participation in space activities. The fund would be
responsible for desludging these facilities. Both
deployed over a five-year period starting from 2025 to
desludging service providers and operators of
2030, with an annual deployment of Rs 150-200 crore.
faecal sludge treatment facilities will have to: (i)
The indicative range of investment in startups is
register on the online portal, and (ii) report data on
between Rs 10-60 crore. Growth stage companies can
a monthly and annual basis. Local bodies will
expect investment in the Rs 10-30 crore band. Late
develop action plans for environmentally sound
growth stage companies that have shown significant
management of faecal sludge.
progress, can attract investments in the Rs 30-60 crore
band. This fund is expected to benefit around 40 Comments are invited till December 6, 2024.
spaced based startup companies. Key objectives of this
fund include: (i) infusion of capital to create a
multiplier effect for further investment, (ii) retention of
space companies domiciled in India, and (iii) accelerate Energy
private sector participation in Indian space sector.
Nripendra Singh (nripendra@prsindia.org)
National Electricity Plan (Transmission)
Environment notified for 2022-32
The Central Electricity Authority (CEA) notified the
Atri Prasad Rout (atri@prsindia.org)
National Electricity Plan (NEP) (Volume-II
Transmission) for 2022-32.21 In May 2023, CEA had
Environment Ministry invites comments on
notified NEP (Volume-I Generation).22 CEA is
draft liquid waste management rules
required to formulate a National Electricity Plan once
The Ministry of Environment, Forest and Climate in five years under the Electricity Act, 2003.23 Key
Change invited comments on the draft Liquid Waste features of the Plan are:
Management Rules, 2024.19 The rules have been
▪ Current Capacity and Target: As of March 31,
issued under the Environment (Protection) Act, 1986.20
2022, India had total installed transmission lines of
Liquid waste management includes environmentally
4,56,716 circuit kilometre (ckm). The NEP plans
sound management of: (i) wastewater, (ii) sludge
to add 1,91,474 ckm of transmission lines during
generated during wastewater treatment and faecal
2022-32 (at voltage levels of 220 kV and above).
sludge, and (iii) utilisation of treated wastewater. Key
features of the draft Rules include: ▪ Target for 2017-22 not met: During 2017-22,
1,04,400 ckm of transmission lines were targeted
▪ Responsibilities of bulk users: Establishments
to be added. Against this target, only 88,865 ckm
with water consumption of more than 5,000 litres
(85%) of transmission lines were added. The Plan
per day or pollution load of more than 10 kg per
noted that target capacity addition for 2017-2022
day in term of biochemical oxygen demand (BOD)
could not be achieved due reasons such as COVID-
will have to register on a centralised online portal.
19 pandemic and delay in getting forest clearance.
BOD is a measure of the level of pollutants in
water. These users will be bound by extended user ▪ Renewable Target: The Plan noted that the
responsibility (EUR) obligation. They will: (i) installed electricity generation capacity from
operate onsite decentralised wastewater treatment renewable energy sources was 193.5 GW as on
facilities, and (ii) meet obligation for minimum May 31, 2024. It observed that the gestation
- 5 -
Monthly Policy Review – October 2024 PRS Legislative Research
period for certain renewable energy-based 8. Role of Farmers and Government in Management
generation projects is lesser than that for its of Crop Residues through Scientific and
associated transmission system. This required the Technological Methods
9. Status of Implementation of the Recommendations
transmission system to be planned well in advance.
of Swaminathan Committee Report
The NEP provides a plan for installing
10. Policies and Projects for Doubling of Income of
transmission system associated with renewable
Farmers
energy capacity of 613 GW by 2032.
11. Impact Report of on-going Agricultural Subsidies
12. Policies and Projects for Water Resources
Guidelines for innovative projects under PM- (including Groundwater), Irrigation Systems,
Surya Ghar Yojana notified Rainfed, Watershed Programs and Drainage
Management
The Ministry of New and Renewable Energy notified 13. Policy Formulation for Pricing of Agriculture
the guidelines for the implementation of innovative Produce
projects under PM-Surya Ghar Yojana.24 The scheme 14. Policies for Diversification of Crops
15. Quality Control of Agriculture Inputs
aims to increase the share of solar rooftop capacity and
16. Procurement of Crops at Minimum Support Price –
empower residential households to generate their own
A Review
electricity. Rs 500 crore has been allocated for
17. Performance Review of Fasal Bima Yojana
innovative projects under the scheme to encourage
18. Rationalisation of GST on Agricultural Machine
advancements in rooftop solar technologies and fund Tools and Other Equipments for Small & Marginal
innovations in business models.25 Farmers
19. Enhancing Productivity of Staple Crops – Govt.
The scheme is open to entities and individuals
Initiatives & Measures
including international co-operation for joint research.
20. Identification of Socio – Economic &
Projects under the scheme can have a maximum Environmental Reasons Leading to Farmers’
duration of 18 months. The selected projects will Suicide
receive financial assistance of up to 60% of their total 21. Extension of Benefits of MNREGA Schemes to
cost or Rs 30 crore, whichever is lower. Proposed Small & Marginal Farmers
projects will be screened by a committee on the basis 22. Development & Augmentation of Agricultural
Produce Marketing System
of: (i) relevance and cost-effectiveness, (ii) project
23. Promotion of Floriculture in the Country –
concept and novelty, and (iii) value to society. The
Prospects and Challenges
proposals forwarded by the screening committee will
24. Provision of Minimum Wage to Farm Labourers.
be selected by a selection committee headed by the
25. Cultivation of Khas-Khas (Poppy Seeds) –
secretary of the Ministry. Prospects and Challenges
26. Post-Harvest Standardization of Moisture
Management and Loss of Moisture during Storage.
27. Compensation to Farmers including Tenant
Annexure Farmers for Losses due to Natural Calamities (Not
just Fasal Bima Yojana).
28. Examination of Price Support Scheme (PSS) ; and
Parliament has constituted some of its Departmentally
Public Distribution System (PDS)
Related Standing Committees. The subjects identified
29. Policies and Provision to benefit Small and
for examination for 2024-25 by the Committees are
Marginal Farmers and SC/ST Farmers
given below. 30. Decreasing Fertile Land due to Indiscriminate
Acquisition of Farm Land for Urbanization,
Table 2: Subjects identified for examination by
Industrialization & Infrastructure Development
Departmentally Related Standing Committees
such as National Highways - A Review
Agriculture, Animal Husbandry, and Food Processing 31. Contribution of ICAR in Agricultural Research for
Tribal and Hilly Regions
Ministry of Agriculture and Farmers Welfare
32. Research and Development in Post-Harvest
1. Production and Availability of Certified Seeds in
Management
the Country
33. Central Island Agricultural Research Institute, Port
2. Functioning of Agricultural Credit System in the
Blair- A Performance Review
Country
34. Role and Performance Appraisal of Krishi Vigyan
3. Production and Availability of Oil Seeds and
Kendras (KVKs) in the Country
Pulses in the Country
35. Research Initiatives and Projects to deal with
4. National Mission on Agricultural Extension and
Pollution in Agriculture and Nitrogen Inefficiency in
Technology
the Soil
5. Organic and Natural Farming – Prospects and
36. Research for Developing Water Efficient Variety of
Challenges
Seeds to Save Ground Water
6. Incentivisation for Mechanization and Adoption of
37. A Performance Review of all Government funded
Modern Techniques in Agriculture Sector
Agricultural Research Institutes, Universities and
7. Effect of Use of Chemical Fertilizers and
ICAR.
Pesticides on Environment and Human Health –
38. Policies on Usage of Genetically Modified,
Ways to Rationalize their Usage.
Engineered, Artificial and Terminator Seeds – A
Review
- 6 -
Monthly Policy Review – October 2024 PRS Legislative Research
7. Availability and method of distribution of Fertilizers.
Ministry of Fisheries, Animal Husbandry, and Dairying
8. Evaluation of Implementation of Fertilizers
1. Role of National Fisheries Development Board
(Movement Control) Order, 1973 with special
(NFDB) in Training and Extension Facilities to
reference to effectiveness of levy of penalties for
Fishermen under the Pradhan Mantri Matsya
violation of the Order.
Sampada Yojana
9. Evaluation and monitoring of Fertilizer Subsidy
2. Development of Deep Sea Fishing
Schemes as well as Fertilizer Innovation
3. Infrastructure and Post-Harvest Management in
Schemes.
Fisheries Sector - An Overview
10. To establish India as a leading manufacturer of
4. Promotion and Development of Sea Weed
chemicals and petrochemicals by initiating
Cultivation
measures including, inter-alia, revival of sick units.
5. Development and Modernization of Fishing
11. Review of the functioning of Central Institute of
Harbours
Petrochemicals Engineering & Technology
6. Development of In-land Fishing Farms (CIPET).
7. Evaluation of Livestock Insurance Schemes 12. Factors impacting Dye-stuffs and dye
intermediates industry.
8. National Livestock Mission – An Appraisal
13. Review of the functioning of Institute of Pesticide
9. Role of National Dairy Development Board for
Formulation Technology (IPFT).
Protection and Development of Indigenous Cattle
14. Setting up of Plastic Waste Management Centres
Breeds
and steps taken to minimize the use of Plastic in
10. Scope for Nutrition and Livelihood in the Dairy
the country.
Sector - An Analysis
15. Production of Molasses, Lithium and Batteries - A
11. Policies and Projects for Growth of Livestock – An
Review.
Evaluation
16. Petroleum, Chemicals and Petrochemical
12. Growth in the Production of Dairy Sector – Review
Investment Regions (PCPIR)
of Various Schemes
17. Health hazards due to use of
13. Evaluation of Quality Control in Dairy Products compromised/substandard quality of foodgrade
14. Measures to Prevent and Control Prevalent plastics and their exposure to extreme Indian
Diseases in Bovine Animals climatic conditions.
Ministry of Food Processing Industries 18. Price Rise of medicines in the Pharmaceutical
1. Initiatives taken in the Food Processing Sector Sector impacting the lives of ordinary citizens
under "Make in India" Program adversely- A Review.
2. Scope for Development of Food Processing 19. Evaluation of the Present Role and Functions of
Industries in India Regulatory Authorities in Pharmaceutical Sector
3. Research and Development in the Food and need for stringent Reforms.
Processing Sector 20. Inclusive growth of the Pharmaceutical Industry
4. Promotion of Cooperatives in Food Processing with stringent quality control and safety standards
Industry while also promoting the use of
Ministry of Cooperation indigenous/traditional medicines and medical
1. Formulation of New Schemes and Programmes for practices.
the Development of Cooperative Societies in the 21. Self-sufficiency in production and availability of
Country Active Pharmaceutical ingredients (API) through
2. Progress in Establishment of National Cooperative various initiatives including Production Linked
Database Incentive Scheme (PLI).
3. Role of National Cooperative Development 22. Review of Activities and Performance of National
Corporation (NCDC) in Strengthening of Institutes of Pharmaceutical Education and
Cooperative Sugar Mills (CSMs) Research (NIPERs) since its inception.
4. Evaluation of Democratic Practices and Reducing 23. Review of Performance of Regulatory Authorities
Administrative Interferences in the Cooperatives of for stringent control of spurious and fake
the Country medicines.
5. Role of Cooperative Societies in Enhancing Coal
Income of the Farmers and Fishermen– A Review
Ministry of Coal
Chemicals and Fertilisers 1. Organizational Structure and Performance of Coal
1. Self-sufficiency in Production of Fertilizers with a India Limited (CIL) – A Review
view to curb import of fertilizers – Review of 2. Land Acquisition and issues of Rehabilitation &
constraints thereof. Resettlement in Coal/Lignite Mining Areas;
2. Non-performing Assets in the form of immovable 3. Research and Development in Coal Sector;
properties that are lying in-operational in the 4. Future of Coal in India's Energy Mix;
Department of Fertilizers and the way forward – A 5. Implementation of Information Technology and
Review. vigilance activities to curb illegal Coal Mining and
3. Matters pertaining to disinvestment of fertilizer theft of coal in the country;
PSUs - A review. 6. Compliance of Environmental Norms by
4. Initiatives for ensuring growth of domestic fertilizer Coal/Lignite Companies;
industry. 7. Review of Coal Mines Workers Welfare
5. Fertilizer Projects and joint ventures for ensuring Programme;
availability of fertilizers and raw materials. 8. Safety in Coal Mines;
6. Evaluation of performance of fertilizer producing 9. Production of Coal and Lignite - Projection and
PSUs. Planning;
- 7 -
Monthly Policy Review – October 2024 PRS Legislative Research
10. Skill development in Coal/Lignite Sector; Ministry of Communications
11. Performance of Coal Controller's Office; 1. Real Estate Management in the Department of
12. Performance of Coal Mines Provident Fund Posts
Organisation (CMPFO); 2. Issues confronting Department of Posts and
13. Coal Distribution and Marketing – A Review: review of services provided by Post Offices
Ministry of Mines 3. Issues confronting Telecom Sector in India
1. Organizational Structure and Performance of 4. Self Reliance in Telecom Manufacturing Sector
Geological Survey of India (GSI)– A Review; 5. Quality of Service (QoS) Standards and Consumer
2. Organizational Structure and Performance of Protection in Telecom Sector
Indian Bureau of Mines (IBM) – A Review; 6. Review of the performance of schemes/projects
3. Measures to curb Illegal Mining of Iron Ore, under Digital Bharat Nidhi (DBN) implemented by
Manganese, Zinc, Limestone, Bauxite etc. in the Public and Private Sector
Country; Consumer Affairs, Food and Public Distribution
4. Implementation and Utilization of District Mineral
Ministry of Consumer Affairs, Food and Public Distribution
Foundation (DMF) Fund, Pradhan Mantri Khanij
1. Storage of foodgrains: Existing infrastructure and
Kshetra Kalyan Yojana (PMKKKY) - A Review
future strategy
and, Social Security for contract workers and their
2. Transportation of foodgrains: Optimizing
relief and rehabilitation;
movement through Railways
5. Mineral Exploration Activities in North Eastern 3. Modernisation of Public Distribution System:
States and its overall impact on development of Strengthening Technical Data base
the region; 4. Control measures to curb wastage of food grains
6. Mineral Policy and its implementation. in FCI godowns
7. Expediting and Simplifying the Environment and 5. Edible Oil Industry: A Review
Forest Clearance Process for Mining Projects. 6. Ethanol and biofuel Production from Sugar,
8. Measures for Abatement of Pollution due to Mining
Sugarcane and Grains: Prospects and Challenges
Activities and Environmental Protection – including
7. Combating Market Malpractices: Ensuring
Chittorgarh Fort, a case study;
accuracy, Quality and Measurement Standards
9. Self-reliance in Minerals and Metals; and
8. Ensuring the availability of Essential Commodities
10. Science and Technology Programme and
with specific reference to petroleum and petroleum
Autonomous Bodies;
products
Ministry of Steel
9. Regulation of Packed Commodities with specific
1. Organizational Structure and Performance of Steel
reference to sugar content in baby products and
Authority of India Limited (SAIL) - A Review
other food products
2. Review of Steel Policy and its Impact on
10. Safeguarding consumer rights in banking sector
Development of Steel Sector including R&D skill
11. Role of Bureau of Indian Standards (BIS) in
development etc.; upholding Quality and Standards
3. Iron Ore Handling Infrastructure at Ports; 12. Expanding the Role of NTH in testing and
4. Major Policy changes assisting Secondary Steel calibration of products
Sector;
Defence
5. Management of Energy efficiency by Steel Plants
and Environmental Issues related to Iron Ore 1. Review of Sainik Schools, Rashtriya Indian Military
Mining; College (RIMC) and Rashtriya Military Schools
6. Development of Manganese Ore Industry in India; 2. Review of working of Border Roads Organization
7. Promotion of Steel Usage; and (BRO) in creating infrastructure in strategic
8. Status of Greenfield and Brownfield Projects of locations and border areas.
Steel PSUs 3. A review of resettlement policies, healthcare
facilities and avenues for Ex-Servicemen (ESM)
Communications and Information Technology
4. Modernization of Defence Public Sector
Ministry of Information and Broadcasting Undertakings (DPSUs)
1. Review of implementation of Laws related to all 5. Review of Corporate Social Responsibility (CSR)
forms of Media initiatives by DPSUs including welfare of Defence
2. Review of mechanism to curb Fake News personnel
3. Review of functioning of Prasar Bharati 6. Review of Indian Air Force as an independent,
Organization professional and strategic force
4. Overview of Film Industry 7. Role of Indian Army in ensuring defence of the
5. Emergence of OTT Platforms and related issues Country
6. Review of functioning of Central Bureau of 8. Role of Indian Navy in ensuring Maritime Security
Communication (CBC) of the Country
Ministry of Electronics and Information Technology 9. Review of working of Indian Coast Guard in
1. Impact of emergence of Artificial Intelligence and ensuring Coastal Security in the Country
related issues 10. Role of Armed Forces Medical Services in
2. Social and digital platforms and their regulation providing healthcare facilities to soldiers deployed
3. Impact of Information Technology Agreement in in difficult and far-flung border areas
the new age 11. Assessment of Indigenous Defence Production
4. Emergence of new forms of currencies and its both by way of Public and Private Sector including
impact major Research Initiatives
5. Digital and cybercrimes – Regulation and 12. Preparedness of the Armed Forces in terms of
Monitoring Hybrid Warfare including cyber, kinetic and non-
kinetic warfare and Anti-Drone capabilities
- 8 -
Monthly Policy Review – October 2024 PRS Legislative Research
13. Review of strategic operational preparedness of 17. Review of steps taken and schemes in
Defence Forces in view of current international implementation for the education of children with
security scenario including Border Security disabilities (CwD) and status of funding for
14. Status of upgradation of various programmes and updating school infrastructure to make it
projects of Defence Research and Development inclusive/disability-friendly
Organisation (DRDO) 18. Review of functioning of University Grants
15. Consolidation of defence lands by Defence Commission (UGC), All India Council for Technical
Estates Organisation and working of Cantonment Education (AICTE), National Assessment and
Boards Accreditation Council (NAAC), National Board of
16. Assessment of Next of Kin (NoK) Policy in the Accreditation (NBA), National Testing Agency
Armed Forces (NTA), with special attention on initiatives in
17. Assessment of rescue operations and readiness pursuance of NEP 2020
for Armed Forces personnel operationally 19. Review of the proliferation of coaching centres to
deployed in difficult terrains. support students in competitive examinations,
Education, Women, Children, Youth, and Sports social issues arising from it, and existing
legislation on the matter
Ministry of Education
20. Review of incidence and scale of leaks in question
1. Review of Samagra Shiksha Scheme, with special
papers for recruitment to public services and
emphasis on PM POSHAN, including efforts to
admission to public educational institutions,
enhance nutrition in mid-day meals, and
including functioning of National Testing Agency
involvement of private parties in service delivery
(NTA) and the Public Examinations (Prevention of
2. Review of reasons for the drop in enrolment in
Unfair Means) Act, 2024
government schools across the country, including
21. Review of the implementation of Article 15(5) of
analysis of current data on quality of schooling
the Indian Constitution and other measures to
3. Review of the need for and feasibility of expanding
support reservations in higher education for
Kendriya Vidyalayas (KVs) and Jawahar
Scheduled Castes, Scheduled Tribes, and socially
Navodaya Vidyalayas (JNVs) to more locations
and educationally backward classes of citizens
and criteria for such expansion
22. Review of financial accessibility of higher
4. Review of PM Schools for Rising India (PM-SHRI)
education and prevalence of education loans in
5. Review of the implementation of the National
India, and existing Government schemes to
Education Policy, 2020, in school education across
enhance access
different states
23. Review of fees attached to entrance exams for
6. Review of objections made by State Governments
educational institutions and recruitment exams for
to the National Education Policy 2020
Government jobs
7. Review and reforms required in the Right of
24. Review of the functioning of Central Universities,
Children to Free and Compulsory Education (RTE)
IITs, IIMs, NITs, and other Institutions of National
Act, 2009, including provisions related to minorities
Importance in higher education
8. Review of policy followed for recruitment of
25. Issues affecting availability of quality faculty/
teachers in each state and current vacancies in
teaching resources in the Higher Education
teaching and non-teaching staff in the country in
Sector, including both Public and Private
light of NEP-2020
Universities, and with focus on IITs, IIMs, NITs,
9. Review of National Council for Teacher Education
and other Institutions of National Importance in
(NCTE) and other initiatives to support training of
higher education
teachers in light of NEP 2020’s thrust on Capacity
26. Integration of vocational education in higher
Building of Teachers
education curricula.
10. Review of grants given to schools by the Union
27. Review of efforts to support mental health for
Government and the utilisation of such grants by
students in higher education
schools
28. Review the progress of the implementation of the
11. Review of the National Council of Educational
National Education Policy (NEP) 2020, and its
Research and Training (NCERT) functioning with
impact on various levels of education
respect to curriculum development and textbook
29. Pradhan Mantri Uchchatar Shiksha Abhiyan (PM-
formulation
USHA) --roadmap for effective implementation
12. Review of current efforts made for education in
30. Review of guidelines followed for accreditation of
law, civics, moral education, physical education,
private universities
agricultural sciences, and vocational training as
31. Review of policies to shift masters program to a
part of the school curriculum
one-year duration and its impact on higher
13. Review of efforts to support continuous
education
assessment, at the school level and at the board-
32. Review of disbursal of grants for research
level, in schooling
associates affiliated with national universities
14. Review of guidelines followed for recognition of
Ministry of Women and Child Development
private schools by government authorities in each
1. Review of the implementation of Beti Bachao, Beti
state
Padhao
15. Review of guidelines issued by state governments
2. Review of Saksham Anganwadi and Poshan 2.0
for setting of fee structure by private schools
Scheme, with attention to Anganwadi worker pay
16. Review of efforts to promote education of
and working conditions, efforts to enhance
minorities, including scholarship grants provided
nutrition in mid-day meals, and involvement of
and online portal through which such grants can
private parties in service delivery
be availed of
- 9 -
Monthly Policy Review – October 2024 PRS Legislative Research
3. Review of schemes to tackle anaemia and 32. Review of efforts to prevent and minimise
malnutrition in pregnant and lactating women, incidence of performance-enhancing drugs in
including Pradhan Mantri Matru Vandana Yojana sports activities
4. Review of PM CARES schemes for children Energy
5. Review of efforts to prevent and address child
Ministry of Power
abuse
1. Energy Security in India - Ensuring uninterrupted
6. Review of the enforcement of child labour laws,
availability of Energy at an affordable Price.
especially in informal jobs
2. Energy Transition - Implication of adopting
7. Review of Mission Shakti and Mission Vatsalya
Dominant Climate Narrative on Energy Sector and
8. Review of functioning of National Commission for
other Sectors in the Country.
Women and scope for improvement in the
3. Energy Conservation and Efficiency.
Grievance Redressal system of the Commission
4. Performance of Thermal (Coal and Gas based)
9. Sexual Harassment of Women at Workplace
Power Plants - Ensuring availability of sufficient
(Prevention, Prohibition, and Redressal) Act, 2013:
quantity of Fuel.
Implementation in the Public and Private Sector,
5. Revival of Hydro Power Sector in the Country.
including informal jobs
6. Revamping of the Transmission Sector -
10. Review of adoption process in India and
Strengthening of the Infrastructure and
functioning of Central Adoption Resource Agency
Management of High Demand in the Power
(CARA)
System.
11. Review of efforts to support women and children’s
7. Strengthening of the Electricity Distribution Sector
mental health and well-being
- Revamped Distribution Sector Scheme with
12. Evaluation of existence and prevalence of unequal
special focus on Aggregate Technical and
pay and fewer job opportunities for women
Commercial (AT&C) Losses and Smart Metering.
13. Review of efforts to increase the number of
8. Ensuring Disaster Preparedness and Response in
women in science and tech jobs
the Power Sector.
14. Review of how women are shown in media
9. Go Electric - Facilitating Electric Mobility and
reinforcing stereotypes
Development of Charging Infrastructure for Electric
15. Review of National Youth Policy, 2021: Status and
Vehicles.
vision
10. Action Plan for ensuring Cyber Security of the
16. Review of trends in drug and alcohol use among
Electricity Sector.
youth and measures to stop proliferation
11. Carbon Footprints of Power Sector in India and
17. Review of National Service Scheme and its
Action Plan for Carbon Credit Trading Scheme.
functioning and financing
12. Role of Power Sector Statutory Bodies, PSUs and
18. Review of Nehru Yuva Kendra Sangathan and its
Institutions in Development of Power Sector.
functioning
13. Emerging Scenario in the Power Sector and Need
19. Review of prevalence and impact of brain drain of
for a New Electricity Policy – An Appraisal.
youth leaving the country for better opportunities
14. Action Plan for Development of Pump Storage
20. Review of efforts to improve technology and
Plants and Battery Energy Storage Systems.
internet access for youth
Ministry of New and Renewable Energy
21. Review of National programme for youth and
1. Roadmap for achievement of 50% cumulative
adolescent development
electric power installed capacity from non-fossil
22. Review of training and skill development for jobs
fuel-based Energy Resources by 2030.
23. Review of Target Olympic Podium Scheme
2. Performance Evaluation of Solar Power Projects in
(TOPS) and ongoing preparation for top
the Country.
performance at international sporting events
3. Pradhan Mantri Kisan Urja Suraksha Evam
24. Review of functioning and performance of Sports
Utthaan Mahabhiyaan (PM-KUSUM) - An
Authority of India (SAI)
Evaluation.
25. Review of progress of Khelo India Scheme and
4. PM Surya Ghar Muft Bijli Yojana - Grid connected
impact on promotion of grassroots Sport,
Solar Rooftop Initiative.
Infrastructure Development and Talent
5. National Green Hydrogen Mission - Role of Green
Identification and Nurturing
Hydrogen in achieving Energy Independence for
26. Review of mechanism to ensure safety and
India.
security of women in sports
6. Ensuring Round-the-Clock-Power (RTC) from
27. Review of governance and functioning of national
Renewable Energy Projects.
sports federations, and relationship between
7. National Bioenergy Programme - An Evaluation.
national sports federations and Department of
8. Green Energy Corridor - Development of
Sports
Evacuation and Transmission Infrastructure for
28. Review of management and accountability in
Renewable Energy.
sports organisations
9. Self Reliance in Renewable Energy Sector -
29. Review of efforts for the promotion of Rural and
Production Linked Incentive (PLI) Scheme for
Indigenous Sports and Rural Sports Development
National Programme on High Efficiency solar PV
30. Review of efforts to encourage private companies
Modules.
to invest in development of sports infrastructure
10. Renewable Energy Financing - Sound and
and facilities, including through Corporate Social
Innovative Financing as the key to accelerated
Responsibility (CSR)
Growth in Renewable Energy Sector.
31. Evaluation of current mechanisms to add sports as
11. New Technologies in Renewable Energy Sector -
a regular part of school learning
Progress in Offshore Wind, Geo Thermal and
Ocean Energy.
- 10 -
Monthly Policy Review – October 2024 PRS Legislative Research
12. Research and Technology Development in 15. Capacity building and enhancing sources of
Renewable Energy Sector. funding of the Urban Local bodies/Municipal
13. Skill Development and Capacity Building in bodies.
Renewable Energy Sector. 16. Evaluation of developmental strategies of heritage
External Affairs cities and cities of religious importance.
17. Regularization of Unauthorized Colonies in Delhi
1. Indian Diaspora Overseas including NRIs, PIOs,
and other cities.
OCIs and Migrant Workers: All Aspects of their
18. Working of Master Plan of Delhi and other cities.
Conditions and Welfare, including the Status of the
19. Waste Water Management, Drainage and Sewage
Emigration Bill
disposal in NCR.
2. Future of India-Bangladesh Relationship
20. Status of Implementation of land pooling policy in
3. India-Sri Lanka Relations and the Way Ahead
Delhi.
4. Looking West: India's Relations with West Asia
21. Construction and allotment policy of Flats by DDA.
5. Evaluation of India's Indian Ocean Strategy
22. Review of functioning of Holiday Homes and
6. India’s Look East Policy: Review of India – ASEAN
Touring Officers Hostels.
Partnership
Labour, Textiles, and Skill Development
7. Indo-Maldives Geopolitics: Challenges,
Opportunities and the Way Forward Ministry of Labour and Employment
8. Opportunities in African Countries and India’s 1. Implementation of the Labour Codes.
Engagement 2. Working Conditions and Welfare Measures for
9. Role of QUAD Mine Workers, including Unauthorised Mines and
10. India Europe Relationship: Opportunities and assessment of working of Directorate General of
Challenges Mines Safety (DGMS).
11. Functioning of Indian Missions Abroad: An 3. Contractual Appointments/Deployments and
Assessment and Evaluation Implementation of Labour Laws concerning the
12. India’s Role in Different Bodies of the United welfare of Contract/Casual Workers in
Nations and its Claim for Permanent Membership Government Organisations/Public Sector
of the UNSC Undertakings/Public Sector Banks/Establishments.
13. India’s Role and Presence in the Arctic and 4. Implementation of Welfare measures for Plantation
Antarctic Regions Workers.
14. Facilitating External Economic Engagement of 5. Functioning of the Employees Provident Fund
States and Union Territories Organisation (EPFO) with special reference to
15. Performance of Passport Issuance System operation of the EPF Pension Scheme and
Including Issuance of e-Passports and Review of Management of Corpus Fund.
the Indian Passport Act and Rules 6. Functioning of Central Board for Workers
16. India’s Engagement with Small Island Countries Education.
7. Implementation of Centrally Sponsored Schemes.
Housing and Urban Affairs
8. Identification and Rehabilitation of Bonded Labour.
1. Pradhan Mantri Awas Yojana (Urban). 9. Implementation of prescribed minimum Wages in
2. Atal Mission for Rejuvenation and Urban various Employment Sectors.
Transformation (AMRUT). 10. Social Security and Welfare Measures to provide
3. Evaluation of Implementation of Swachh Bharat old age protection to Unorganised/ Informal Sector
Mission (Urban). Workers including Gig/Scheme Workers, Street
4. PM-eBus Sewa Scheme. Vendors, Stone Crushers, Fishermen and Workers
5. Review of progress of various schemes and in IT and Telecommunication Sectors
programmes of the Ministry i.e. Smart City 11. Safeguards and measures for protecting the
Mission, PM Street Vendor’s Atma Nirbhar Nidhi interest of overseas contract workers and the
(PM SVANidhi), National Urban Livelihood Mission Returnees, particularly in the Middle East Region.
(DAY-NULM), National Urban Digital Mission 12. Employment Generation Programmes - A Review.
(NUDM) etc. 13. Empowerment of Women Workforce – An insight
6. Review of need and progress of Metro in various into their working conditions and implementation of
cities. various provisions available to them.
7. Implementation of Real Estate (Regulation and 14. India and International Labour Organisation (ILO) -
Development) Act, 2016. Achieving objectives and review of conventions
8. Regional Rapid Transit System and role of binding on India.
NCRTC. 15. Expanding and providing affordable health care
9. Slums Redevelopment and Resettlement. facilities to the workers and their families in the
10. Planning, Earmarking, Creation and Development organised and unorganised sectors through ESIC
of Vending Zones for Street Vendors in Cities. with particular reference to rural and underserved
11. Review of functioning of HUDCO, NBCC and areas – challenges and resolution.
Town & Country Planning Organisation. 16. Social security measures to ensure welfare of
12. Redevelopment of General Pool Residential workers in Railways, Roadways, Airlines and
Accommodation (GPRA) colonies and measures Ports.
for augmentation of Government residential Ministry of Textiles
quarters. 1. Skill Development vis-à-vis Manufacturing and
13. Improving the standard and quality of living in Upgradation in Textiles Sector.
urban cities. 2. Challenges/Opportunities in Indian Textile
14. Environmentally sustainable techniques in urban Industry.
planning. 3. Status/Performance of Handloom Sector.
- 11 -
Monthly Policy Review – October 2024 PRS Legislative Research
4. Status and Reforming of Power loom Sector. 19. Review of SATAT and Bio-diesel schemes.
5. Performance of Marketing Agencies of Handlooms Railways
and Handicrafts.
6. Functioning of National Textile Corporation (NTC). 1. Ensuring safety in Indian Rail operations.
7. Challenges/Opportunities in the Wool Sector. 2. Optimum utilisation of Railway land
8. Scope of Public-Private Sector partnership in 3. Status and financing of various expansion and
Textile Sector. upgradation related projects of Indian Railways
9. Review of the functioning of Textile Cluster 4. Role of Railway PSUs in growth and expansion of
Development Scheme (TCDS). Indian Railways
10. Impact of waste emerging from Textile production 5. Improvement of public facilities at Railway Stations
on the environment and measures/initiatives taken 6. Construction and maintenance of Rail tunnels and
to curb it. Bridges including Road Over Bridges/Road Under
11. Review of the functioning of SAMARTH - Scheme Bridges
for Capacity Building in Textile Sector. 7. Human resource management in Indian Railways
12. Challenges and prospects under North Eastern 8. Upgradation of tracks and signaling in Indian
Textile Promotion Scheme (NERTPS) with special Railways
focus on Sericulture. 9. Increasing freight related earnings of Indian
13. Measures for promotion of Traditional handicrafts Railways and development of Dedicated Freight
and preservation of dying arts. Corridors
14. Implementation of Prime Minister Mega Integrated 10. Sub-urban Train Services of Indian Railways
Textile Region and Apparel (PM MITRA) Scheme. 11. Passenger Reservation System in Indian Railways
Ministry of Skill Development and Entrepreneurship 12. Energy efficiency in Indian Railways
1. National Skills Qualifications Framework – An 13. Evaluation of onboard services in Indian Railways
Assessment. 14. Expansion of Rail Network in North East and
2. Functioning of National Skill Development Union Territories
Corporation (NSDC). 15. Review of Rail infrastructure and projects in
3. Skill Training in Food Processing, Agriculture and coastal regions
Allied Sectors. 16. Performance of Production Units and Railway
4. Recognition of Skills of Agniveers Scheme – An Workshops of Indian Railways
Assessment. 17. Promotion of Railway based tourism
5. Introduction of New ITI Upgradation Scheme. 18. High Speed Rail network in India
6. Skill Development under One District One Product 19. Role of Indian Railways in development of multi-
(ODOP) Scheme. modal logistic parks and their integration with road
7. Functioning of the National Council for Vocational and port network
Education and Training (NCVET). 20. Making Indian Railways self-reliant through
Petroleum and Natural Gas innovation and promotion of indigenous sources
1. Pricing, Marketing and Supply of Petroleum Social Justice and Empowerment
Products and Natural Gas; 1. Review of functioning of National Scheduled
2. Contract Management and Transparency in Castes Finance Development Corporation
Procurement Procedures of Oil PSUs; (NSFDC).
3. Review of performance of BPCL refineries; 2. Scholarship Schemes for SCs, OBCs and Children
4. Review of Human Resource Policies of Oil PSUs; of persons engaged in hazardous and unclean
5. CSR activities of oil PSUs; occupations including Evaluation studies & their
6. Initiatives undertaken by Oil PSUs under implementation.
‘Atmanirbhar Bharat Scheme’; 3. Economic Empowerment through Skill
7. Steps taken to reduce Import Dependence of Development Schemes for SCs, OBCs, DNTs and
Crude Oil; EBCs.
8. Review of on-going projects of Oil PSUs including 4. Grants-in-aid to NGOs working for social welfare
CGD Projects; and evaluation of their functioning and
9. Review of Exploration & Production Activities of Oil performance.
PSUs; 5. Review of the functioning of National Handicapped
10. Examination of R&D activities of Oil PSUs; Finance and Development Corporation (NHFDC).
11. Initiatives undertaken by Oil PSUs towards 6. Review of functioning of National Trust for the
achieving Net – Zero; Welfare of Persons with Autism, Cerebral Palsy,
12. Safety, Security and Environmental issues in Mental Retardation and Multiple Disabilities.
Petroleum Sector; 7. Review of functioning of Deendayal Disabled
13. Review of Coal Bed Methane Policy; Rehabilitation Scheme (DDRS).
14. Review of Indradhanush Gas Grid Limited towards 8. Implementation of reservation policy for
implementing hydrocarbon vision 2030 for North- Divyangjan.
East; 9. Review of Accessible India Campaign.
15. Examination of production and consumption 10. Schemes for Educational and Economic
pattern of BS VI compliant fuels in India; empowerment of Tribals.
16. Review of LNG Infrastructure in the country; 11. Review of functioning of Tribal Research Institutes
17. Examination of International Operations and (TRIs).
Investments of Oil PSUs; 12. Review of Marketing Support for Tribal Produce.
18. National Green Hydrogen Mission-opportunities 13. Review of the functioning of the National
and challenges for Oil PSUs; and Scheduled Tribes Finance and Development
Corporation (NSTFDC).
- 12 -
Monthly Policy Review – October 2024 PRS Legislative Research
14. Review of the functioning of the Tribal Cooperative 6. Interlinking of rivers to improve water availability in
Marketing Development Federation of India water scarce regions.
Limited (TRIFED). 7. Water Use Efficiency in India.
15. Schemes/programmes implemented for the 8. Water resource management in North Eastern
welfare of Tribals under Corporate Social States with particular reference to problem of flood
Responsibility (CSR). and soil erosion.
16. Review of the Implementation of the Scheduled 9. Maintenance and Creation of Water Bodies - Role
Tribes and Other Traditional Forest Dwellers Act, of the (i) Government and Local Bodies; and (ii)
2006. Industries under Corporate Social Responsibility
17. Review of Scholarship Schemes for Minority (CSR).
Students. 10. Rain Water Harvesting in India.
18. Schemes/programmes implemented for the 11. Protection of river banks, flood plains and
welfare of Minorities under Corporate social initiatives for control of soil erosion.
responsibility (CSR). 12. Adverse effect of climate changes with particular
19. Review of the Implementation of Pradhan Mantri reference to problem of water scarcity for
Jan Vikas Karyakarm (PMJKY). irrigation.
20. Review of Pradhan Mantri Virasat Ka Samvardhan 13. Review of the role and working of WAPCOS
(PM VIKAS) Limited and NPCC Limited.
21. Review of Financial Assistance provided to 14. Inclusive water planning for sustainable
NGO/Societies for welfare of SC/ST/OBC/PWD development
22. Priority Sector lending by Banks to SCs, STs, 15. Role of advance technologies in mitigating the
OBCs, differently abled persons and the threat posed by Floods in coastal areas
Minorities. 16. Contamination of water sources; factors
Transport, Tourism, and Culture responsible and remedial measures to check
water contamination.
1. Review of Progress of e-Mobility Infrastructure and
17. Water management in Forest Areas, Tiger
Growth of e-Vehicles;
Reserves and Sanctuaries.
2. Addressing traffic congestion and encroachment
18. Massive encroachment in river embankment /
on National Highways;
riverfront and wetland.
3. Issues relating to construction of National
19. Backwater management, stagnation & depletion in
Highways;
the country.
4. Review of Implementation of UDAN Scheme and
20. Review of functioning of North-East Water
Advanced Landing Grounds;
Management Authority-review of the mandate,
5. Review of the functioning of Directorate General of
plan of action and project activities under the
Civil Aviation;
authority.
6. National Mission on Cultural Mapping and
21. Review of Major, Medium and Micro irrigation
Roadmap, and Promotion of Local and Indigenous
projects in India alongwith their status and
Art;
progress of (i) Participatory Irrigation Management
7. Digital Preservation of Ancient Indian Manuscripts
(PIM); (ii) Water Users Association (WUAs); and
and Documentation of Artefacts;
(iii) Drip Irrigation / Sprinklers
8. Improvement of Maritime Education and Training
22. Drinking Water Supply in Coastal Areas- Setting
Facilities;
up of Desalination Plants.
9. Development of Ports: Challenges and Solutions;
23. Availability of Safe Drinking Water in Rural India –
and
Issues and Approaches.
10. Development of Theme-based Tourist Circuits with
24. Quality of Drinking Water in Rural India - Review
special emphasis on Spiritual Tourism.
of measures taken and achievements.
Water Resources 25. Conservation, development, Management and
1. Conservation, Development, Management and abatement of pollutants/ contamination of ground
Abatement of pollution in river Ganga and its water sources in rural areas.
Tributaries under Namami Gange programme with 26. Review of performance of Jal Jeevan Mission-
particular reference to project deliverables and Quality and functional sustainability of piped water
timelines as well as performance of State supply infrastructure created under JJM in rural
Governments. area
2. Conservation and Abatement of Pollution in river 27. Review of performance of Swachh Bharat Mission-
Cauvery and other major rivers of South India. Phase II – (i) Quality and sustainability of
3. Implementation of Atal Bhujal Yojana and Ground sanitation infrastructure created under Swachh
Water Management in the Country. Bharat Mission with particular reference to
4. Flood scenario and effectiveness of measures achievement of open defecation free (ODF) plus
taken to combat excessive floods in the Country. target for all village and (ii) GOBARdhan a waste
5. Measures Taken for safety of Dams. to wealth initiative in the country.
1 Consumer Price Index Numbers on Base 2012=100 for Rural, 2 “Index Numbers of Wholesale Price in India for the Month of
Urban and Combined for the Month of September 2024, National September, 2024 (Base Year: 2011-12)”, Press Information Bureau,
Statistics Office, Ministry of Statistics and Programme Ministry of Commerce and Industry, October 14, 2024,
Implementation, October 14, 2024, https://pib.gov.in/PressReleasePage.aspx?PRID=2064586.
https://www.mospi.gov.in/sites/default/files/press_release/CPI_PR_1 3 Resolution of the Monetary Policy Committee (MPC) October 7 to
4oct24.pdf. 9, 2024, Monetary Policy Statement, 2024-25, Reserve Bank of
- 13 -
Monthly Policy Review – October 2024 PRS Legislative Research
Family Welfare, Press Information Bureau, October 7, 2024,
https://pib.gov.in/PressReleasePage.aspx?PRID=2062928.
India, October 9, 2024,
18 Union Cabinet approves establishment of Rs.1,000 crore Venture
https://rbidocs.rbi.org.in/rdocs/PressRelease/PDFs/PR1252500AD1D
Capital Fund for Space Sector under aegis of IN-SPACe, Department
6DF27491B900F3C41B7FAE460.PDF.
of Space, Press Information Bureau, October 24, 2024,
4 F. NO-CSR/13/35/2024, Ministry of Corporate Affairs, October 3,
https://pib.gov.in/PressReleasePage.aspx?PRID=2067667
2024,
19 Liquid Waste Management Rules, 2024, Ministry of Environment,
https://pminternship.mca.gov.in/assets/docs/PMIS_Guidelines.pdf.
Forest, and Climate Change, October 7, 2024,
5 Writ Petition (Civil) No. 274 of 2009, Supreme Court of India,
https://egazette.gov.in/WriteReadData/2024/257748.pdf.
October 17, 2024,
20 Environment (Protection) Act, 1986,
https://api.sci.gov.in/supremecourt/2009/16113/16113_2009_1_1501
https://www.indiacode.nic.in/bitstream/123456789/4316/1/ep_act_19
_56604_Judgement_17-Oct-2024.pdf.
86.pdf.
6 Citizenship Act, 1955,
21 National Electricity Plan (Volume 2) Transmission, Central
https://www.indiacode.nic.in/bitstream/123456789/1522/1/a1955-
Electricity Authority, https://cea.nic.in/wp-
57.pdf.
content/uploads/notification/2024/10/National_Electricity_Plan_Volu
7 Article 14, Part 3, Constitution of India,
me_II_Transmission.pdf.
https://www.indiacode.nic.in/bitstream/123456789/15240/1/constituti
22 National Electricity Plan (Volume 1) Generation, Central
on_of_india.pdf.
Electricity Authority, May 31, 2023,
8 Civil Appeal No. 152 of 2007, State of U.P. vs M/S. Lalta Prasad
https://cea.nic.in/wpcontent/uploads/irp/2023/05/NEP_2022_32_FIN
Vaish and Sons, Supreme Court of India, October 23, 2024,
AL_GAZETTE1.pdf.
https://api.sci.gov.in/supremecourt/2005/12996/12996_2005_1_1501
23 The Electricity Act, 2003,
_56796_Judgement_23-Oct-2024.pdf.
https://www.indiacode.nic.in/handle/123456789/2058?sam_handle=1
9 Entry No. 8, List II, Seventh Schedule, The Constitution of India.
23456789/1362.
10 “Cabinet approves the PM Rashtriya Krishi Vikas Yojana (PM-
24 “MNRE notifies Scheme Guidelines for ₹500 crore ‘Innovative
RKVY) to promote sustainable agriculture and Krishonnati Yojana
Projects’ component under PM-Surya Ghar Yojana”, Press
(KY) to achieve food security for self sufficiency”, Press Information
Information Bureau, Ministry of New and Renewable Energy,
Bureau, Cabinet, October 3, 2024,
October 11, 2024,
https://pib.gov.in/PressReleasePage.aspx?PRID=2061649.
https://pib.gov.in/PressReleseDetail.aspx?PRID=2064203&reg=3&la
11 “Cabinet Approves National Mission on Edible Oils – Oilseeds
ng=1.
(NMEO-Oilseeds) for 2024-25 to 2030-31”, Press Information
25 “No.: 318/17/2024- Grid Connected Rooftop(part 14) Mission
Bureau, Cabinet, October 3, 2024,
Directorate, PM-Surya Ghar: Muft Bijli Yojana”, Press Information
https://pib.gov.in/PressReleasePage.aspx?PRID=2061646.
Bureau, Ministry of New and Renewable Energy, October 8, 2024,
12 Third Advance Estimates of production of Foodgrains, Oilseeds
https://static.pib.gov.in/WriteReadData/specificdocs/documents/2024
and Other Commercial Crops for the year 2023-24 – released on June
/oct/doc20241011414801.pdf.
4, 2024,
https://dfpd.gov.in/Home/ContentManagement?Url=edible_oil_scena
DISCLAIMER: This document is being furnished to you for your
rio.html&ManuId=3&language=1.
information. You may choose to reproduce or redistribute this
13 “Cabinet approves Minimum Support Prices (MSP) for Rabi Crops
report for non-commercial purposes in part or in full to any other
for Marketing Season 2025-26”, Press Information Bureau, Cabinet
person with due acknowledgement of PRS Legislative Research
Committee on Economic Affairs, October 16, 2024,
(“PRS”). The opinions expressed herein are entirely those of the
https://pib.gov.in/PressReleasePage.aspx?PRID=2065309.
author(s). PRS makes every effort to use reliable and
14 National Food Security Act, 2013,
comprehensive information, but PRS does not represent that the
https://www.indiacode.nic.in/bitstream/123456789/2113/1/201320.pd
contents of the report are accurate or complete. PRS is an
f.
independent, not-for-profit group. This document has been
15 “Cabinet approves continuation of supply of free Fortified Rice
prepared without regard to the objectives or opinions of those
under Pradhan Mantri Garib Kalyan Anna Yojana (PMGKAY) and
who may receive it.
other welfare schemes from July, 2024 to December, 2028”, Press
Information Bureau, Cabinet, October 9, 2024,
https://pib.gov.in/PressReleasePage.aspx?PRID=2063446.
16 Draft National Sports Governance Bill, 2024,
https://yas.nic.in/sites/default/files/Draft%20National%20Sports%20
Governance%20Bill%20-2024.pdf.
17 “Union Health Minister Unveils Key Initiatives to boost Nutrition
Support for TB Patients and their Families”, Ministry of Health and
- 14 -
