Monthly Policy Review
September 2023
Highlights of this Issue
Special Session of Parliament held from September 18 to September 21, 2023 (p. 2)
Five Bills were listed for consideration and passing; none were passed. The Women’s Reservation Bill was
introduced and passed.
Parliament passes Bill to provide reservation to women in legislatures (p. 2)
The Bill reserves one third of all seats for women in Lok Sabha, state legislative assemblies, and the Legislative
Assembly of the National Capital Territory of Delhi.
Current account deficit at 1.1% of GDP in the first quarter of 2023-24 (p. 2)
India recorded a current account deficit of USD 9.2 billion (1.1% of GDP) in the first quarter (April-June) of
2023-24, significantly lower than USD 17.9 billion (2.1% of GDP) in the corresponding quarter of 2022-23.
Law Commission Report on age of consent under POCSO Act (p. 3)
The Commission recommended against reducing the age of consent under the POCSO Act to 16 years. It
recommended amendments to provide relief for sexual activities with tacit approval of a child 16 years or above.
Central government constitutes Committee to review simultaneous elections (p. 2)
The Committee will review and suggest changes to laws and regulations related to holding simultaneous
elections for Lok Sabha, State Assemblies, and local bodies.
Standing Committees submit reports on various subjects and policies
Reports submitted include: (i) prison conditions, infrastructure and reforms, (ii) the Employees State Insurance
Corporation, (iii) implementation of NEP and (iv) the working of the Archaeological Survey of India.
Cabinet approves Phase III of e-Courts scheme (p. 5)
Phase-III of the scheme aims to create a unified technology platform for the judiciary, facilitating paperless
interface between the courts and litigants. It will span for four years with a financial outlay of Rs 7,210 crore.
TRAI releases several recommendations (p. 5)
TRAI has released several recommendations across various sectors, such as: (i) promoting network and telecom
equipment manufacturing, (ii) issues related to FM Radio Broadcasting, and (iii) connectivity in the north-east.
Bharat New Car Assessment Programme for assessing crash safety notified (p. 7)
The Programme rates cars based on their performance in crash tests. Cars up to 3.5 tonnes will be eligible for
the tests and based on performance will be awarded star ratings corresponding to their safety.
Comments invited on guidelines regulating dark patterns in e-commerce (p. 6)
The draft guidelines seek to prohibit the use of dark patterns in e-commerce. Dark patterns are deceptive design
patterns in user interfaces designed to mislead or trick users into performing unintended actions.
Framework for promoting energy storage systems released (p. 9)
Energy storage systems are used to store energy generated, especially from renewable sources. They are crucial
for implementation of renewable energy. The framework promotes the development of such energy storage.
Extended Producer Responsibility Rules for used oil notified (p. 10)
The Rules outline responsibilities of used oil stakeholders such as responsibility of Central Pollution Control
Board for integrating all stakeholders with a central digital system and conduct awareness programmes.
October 3, 2023
PRS Legislative Research ◼ Institute for Policy Research Studies
3rd Floor, Gandharva Mahavidyalaya ◼ 212, Deen Dayal Upadhyaya Marg ◼ New Delhi – 110002
Tel: (011) 23234801, 43434035 ◼ www.prsindia.org
Monthly Policy Review – September 2023 PRS Legislative Research
Parliament Table 1: Balance of payments, Q1 2023-24 (USD
billion)
Q1 Q4 Q1
Special Session 2023 held; Women’s
2022-23 2022-23 2023-24
Reservation Bill passed
Imports 185.9 168.4 161.6
Arpita Mallick (arpita@prsindia.org)
Exports 122.8 115.8 105.0
The Special Session of Parliament was held from Net Services 31.1 39.1 35.1
September 18, 2023 to September 21, 2023, with four Other transfers 14.0 12.2 12.3
sittings. The Constitution (One Hundred and Twenty-
Current account* -17.9 -1.4 -9.2
Eighth Amendment) Bill, 2023 (Women’s Reservation
Bill), was introduced and passed during this session. Capital account* 22.1 6.5 34.4
The Bill reserves one-third of all seats for women in Errors and omissions 0.5 0.4 -0.7
Lok Sabha, state legislative assemblies, and the
Change in reserves 4.6 5.6 24.4
Legislative Assembly of Delhi.
Note: *Negative figures indicate a deficit.
For more details on legislative business transacted Sources: RBI; PRS.
during the Special Session 2023, see here.
Standing Committees identify subjects for
Law and Justice
examination during 2023-24
Pratinav Damani (pratinav@prsindia.org)
Bill to provide reservation to women in Lok
Sabha and state assemblies passed
14 of the 24 Departmentally Related Standing
Committees of Parliament have identified subjects for Tushar Chakrabarty (tushar@prsindia.org)
detailed examination during the year 2023-24. These
are listed in the Annexure. The Constitution (One Hundred and Twenty-Eighth
Amendment) Bill, 2023 was passed in Parliament.2
The Bill reserves one-third of all seats for women in
Lok Sabha, state legislative assemblies, and the
Macroeconomic Development Legislative Assembly of the National Capital Territory
of Delhi. Additionally, this reservation will also extend
Tushar Chakrabarty (tushar@prsindia.org)
to the seats reserved for SCs and STs in Lok Sabha and
state legislative assemblies. Key features are:
Current account deficit at 1.1% of GDP in the
first quarter of 2023-24 ▪ Commencement of reservation: The reservation
will be effective after a delimitation following the
India recorded a current account deficit of USD 9.2 next census. It will be provided for a period of 15
billion (1.1% of GDP) in the first quarter (April-June) years. However, it shall continue till such date as
of 2023-24, significantly lower than the deficit of USD determined by a law made by Parliament.
17.9 billion (2.1% of GDP) in the corresponding
quarter of 2022-23.1 In the same period, merchandise ▪ Rotation of seats: Seats reserved for women will
be rotated after each delimitation.
trade deficit narrowed from USD 63.1 billion to USD
56.6 billion. Current account deficit was USD 1.3 For a PRS analysis of the Bill, see here.
billion (0.2% of GDP) in the fourth quarter (January-
March) of 2022-23. Central government constitutes Committee on
The capital account registered a net inflow of USD 34.4 simultaneous elections
billion in the first quarter of 2023-24 as compared to a
Alaya Purewal (alaya@prsindia.org)
net inflow of USD 22.1 billion in the corresponding
quarter of 2022-23. Foreign portfolio investments
The central government constituted a High-Level
registered a net inflow of USD 15.7 billion in the first
Committee to examine and make recommendations on
quarter of 2023-24 as compared to a net outflow of
holding simultaneous elections.3 Simultaneous
USD 14.6 billion in the first quarter of 2022-23. In the
elections refer to the elections of Lok Sabha, state
fourth quarter of 2022-23, the capital account had
legislatures, and local bodies being conducted at the
registered a net inflow of USD 6.5 billion.
same time. The Committee shall comprise former
Foreign exchange reserves increased by USD 24.4 President, Mr. Ram Nath Kovind as Chairman and has
billion in the first quarter of 2023-24, significantly seven members. The members of the Committee
higher than an increase of USD 4.6 billion in the same include: (i) Mr. Amit Shah (Minister of Home Affairs),
quarter last year. (ii) Mr. Ghulam Nabi Azad (former Leader of
- 2-
Monthly Policy Review – September 2023 PRS Legislative Research
Opposition of Rajya Sabha), and (iii) Mr. N.K. Singh relations with a child irrespective of his or her consent.
(former Chairman of the 15th Finance Commission). Key observations and recommendations of the
Commission include:
The Committee will review and suggest changes to
laws and regulations related to holding simultaneous ▪ Age of consent: The Commission noted that in
elections for Lok Sabha, State Assemblies, and local most cases of child sexual abuse, the perpetrators
bodies. These changes may include amendments to the are someone close to the child, or may belong to
Constitution, the Representation of the People Act, the same family. In such cases, consent can be
1950, and the Representation of the People Act, 1951. manufactured. The Commission recommended
The Committee will also examine whether the against reducing the age of consent under the
Constitutional amendments will require ratification by POCSO Act to 16 years.
states. Further, the Committee will: (i) suggest a
▪ Child above 16 years: The Commission noted
framework for synchronising elections, (ii) recommend
that sexual activities with tacit approval of a child
safeguards to ensure the continuity of the cycle of
between 16 and 18 years being prosecuted under
simultaneous elections, (iii) examine the logistical and
the 2012 Act is a cause of concern. It
manpower requirements, and (iv) recommend the
recommended amendments to the sections related
modalities for the use of a single electoral roll and
to punishment for penetrative sexual assault and
identity cards for voters in different elections.
sexual assault under the POCSO Act. The
The Committee is expected to make recommendations amendments states that a lower sentence may be
at the earliest. imposed on the accused if the child was 16 years or
above at the time of the offence. This would
Cabinet approves eCourts Phase-III require certain criteria to be satisfied. These
include: (i) the Special Court being satisfied that
Alaya Purewal (alaya@prsindia.org)
the relationship between the accused and child was
intimate, (ii) presence of tacit approval from the
The Union Cabinet approved Phase III of the eCourts
child, (iii) an age difference of not more than three
Project as a central sector scheme from 2023 to 2027.4
years between the accused and the child, (iv) no
The project will receive a financial outlay of Rs 7,210
criminal history of the accused, (v) no element of
crore. The eCourts project was initiated in 2007 to
undue influence, force, or violence being present,
digitally enable the Indian judiciary. Phase-II of the
and (vi) the accused not being in a dominating
scheme concluded in 2023. Phase-I of the scheme led
position to intimidate the child and the parents.
to the computerization of a large number of district
courts.5 Further, Phase-II of the scheme aimed to ▪ The Indian Penal Code (IPC): Currently, under
provide service delivery to citizens, such as accessible the IPC, consensual sex between a husband and his
websites in local languages. wife (who is below 18 years) will amount to rape.8
The Commission noted that solely amending the
Phase-III aims to create a unified technology platform
POCSO Act to provide relief for adolescent
for the judiciary along with facilitating a paperless
romantic relationships would be meaningless
interface between the courts, litigants, and other
without amending the IPC. Therefore, the
stakeholders. The objective of Phase-III is to digitise
Commission recommended carrying out suitable
entire courts records. Approximately 28% of the
amendments to the IPC.
budgetary outlay is estimated to be spent on scanning,
digitisation, and digital preservation of case records,
Law Commission report on enabling online
while about 17% is estimated to be spent on cloud
registration of FIR under CrPC
infrastructure. The expected outcomes of the scheme
include: (i) providing judicial services to citizens Alaya Purewal (alaya@prsindia.org)
without technology access via eSewa Kendras, (ii)
enabling payment of courts fees and fines from The Law Commission (Chair: Justice Ritu Raj
anywhere, and (iii) minimising reliance on paper-based Awasthi) submitted its report on “Amendment in
court filings. Section 154 of The Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973
for Enabling Online Registration of FIR”. Section 154
Law Commission submits report on age of of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973 pertains to
consent under POCSO Act information provided to the police regarding the
commission of a cognisable offence. First Information
Alaya Purewal (alaya@prsindia.org)
Reports (FIRs) are covered under this section.
The Law Commission (Chair: Justice Ritu Raj The Bureau of Police Research and Development
Awasthi) submitted its report on ‘Age of Consent under informed the Commission that states have been
the Protection of Children from Sexual Offences Act, requested to download the relevant software and
2012’.6 Under the Protection of Children from Sexual implement the e-FIR module. The Commission noted
Offences (POCSO) Act, a child is defined as anyone that eight states, including Delhi, Rajasthan and Uttar
under 18 years old.7 The Act criminalises sexual Pradesh, have implemented the registration of e-FIRs.
- 3-
Monthly Policy Review – September 2023 PRS Legislative Research
Further, citizens can lodge online complaints regarding RBI issues directions on release of property
cyber-crime. As of July 1, 2023, approximately 25 documents on repayment of personal loans
lakh cyber-crime complaints have been lodged and
The Reserve Bank of India (RBI) issued directions for
forwarded to the relevant states. The Commission
the release of movable/immovable property documents
recommended a phased implementation of e-FIRs. It
by regulated entities (such as banks) upon the
recommended enabling e-FIRs for all cognisable
repayment of personal loans.10 Personal loans include
offences where the accused is not known and
education loans, housing loans, and loans for
cognisable offences punishable with imprisonment up
investments in financial assets. Under the fair practices
to three years, where the accused is known. The
code (issued by RBI), regulated entities must release all
Commission also highlighted that the data provided
property documents on receiving full repayment and
while registering e-FIRs should not be compromised.
closure of a loan account. However, RBI has observed
divergent practices in the release of such documents.
The directions require regulated entities to release the
original property documents within 30 days after the
Finance
full repayment/settlement of loan account. In case of
any delay caused by the regulated entity, a
Tushar Chakrabarty (tushar@prsindia.org)
compensation of Rs 5,000 will be paid for each day of
delay to the borrower.
RBI releases directions on investment portfolio
of commercial banks These directions will be applicable from December 1,
2023.
The Reserve Bank of India (RBI) released the RBI
(Classification, Valuation and Operation of Investment
RBI issues draft directions for treatment of
Portfolio of Commercial Banks) Directions, 2023.9
wilful and large defaulters
The framework will be applicable for all commercial
banks, excluding regional rural banks, from April 1, The Reserve Bank of India (RBI) issued the draft RBI
2024. Key features include: (Treatment of Wilful Defaulters and Large Defaulters)
Directions, 2023 for public feedback.11 The draft
▪ Investment policy framework: Banks must
directions seek to provide a procedure for classification
adopt an investment policy approved by their
of a borrower as wilful defaulter by lenders. Key
boards. The policy must include: (i) investment
features include:
criteria and objectives to be achieved through
investment transactions, (ii) securities in which ▪ Wilful defaulter: A wilful defaulter refers to: (i) a
banks can invest, and (iii) derivatives in which the borrower or guarantor who has committed wilful
banks can deal. The policy will provide for default of at least Rs 25 lakh or as notified by RBI,
prudential limits for investment in securities, such (ii) promoters and directors associated at the time
as limits for investing in bonds issued by public of default if the defaulter is a company, and (iii)
sector undertakings and corporates. Banks must persons in charge of and responsible for
establish an equity research department to ensure management of the affairs of an entity (other than
expertise in the field. companies). Large defaulter refers to a defaulter
with an outstanding amount of at least one crore
▪ Categorisation of investments: Investment
rupees and whose account has been categorised as
portfolio of banks must be categorised into: (i)
a doubtful or loss account.
held to maturity (securities acquired with the
intention of holding them to maturity), (ii) ▪ Wilful default by a borrower will be deemed to
available for sale (securities acquired for collecting have occurred when he defaults in meeting
cash flows as well as sale), and (iii) fair value payment/repayment obligations to the lender. In
through profit and loss (securities that do not fall in addition, at least one of specified conditions need
the above two categories). Reclassification of to be fulfilled. These include: (i) default despite
securities will require approval from the bank’s having the capacity to honour the obligations, (ii)
board as well as RBI. diversion or siphoning off of funds availed from
the lender, or (iii) disposal of assets given for
▪ Internal control system: Banks must have a
securing the credit without the lender’s knowledge.
robust internal control mechanism for investment
Wilful default by a guarantor will be deemed to
transactions. This includes: (i) periodic
have occurred if he does not honour the guarantee
reconciliation of the investment book, (ii)
invoked by the lender despite having the ability to
valuation of portfolios, and (iii) monitoring of
do so.
prudential and risk limits.
▪ Identification of wilful defaulters: The evidence
of wilful default will be examined by an
identification committee (comprising of whole-
time director as chairperson and two senior
- 4-
Monthly Policy Review – September 2023 PRS Legislative Research
officials) set up by the lender. If the committee is Home Affairs should provide a clear definition of
satisfied that wilful default has occurred, it will young offenders along with a common guideline to
issue a show-cause notice to the borrower. The all states/UTs. Further, while examining the
borrower will be given an opportunity to submit a availability of borstal schools (youth detention
representation to a review committee setup by the centre), the Committee noted that not all
lender (comprising of the chief executive officer as states/UTs have such schools. Only eight states
chairperson and two independent directors). The including Tamil Nadu, Himachal Pradesh, and
review committee will provide the borrower an Jharkhand have borstal schools. It recommended
opportunity of a personal hearing. It will opening at least one to two such schools in states.
subsequently pass an order and communicate the
▪ Women prisoners: The Committee recommended
same to the wilful defaulter.
giving special attention to pregnant women,
▪ Measures against wilful defaulters: Lenders including the ability to give birth outside prison
may initiate criminal proceedings against wilful and proper prenatal and postnatal care. To ensure
defaulters, if warranted. Wilful defaulters will not a nurturing environment for the children, the
be eligible for restructuring of credit facility. No Committee recommended allowing babies born in
additional credit facility will be granted by any prison to stay with their mothers till the age of 12
lender to a wilful defaulter or any entity associated years. Currently, children born in prison can stay
with a wilful defaulter. with their mothers till the age of six years.
Comments are invited by October 31, 2023. For a PRS summary, see here.
Home Affairs Communications
Alaya Purewal (alaya@prsindia.org) Pratinav Damani (pratinav@prsindia.org)
Standing Committee report on prison TRAI releases recommendations on several
conditions, infrastructure, and reforms subjects
The Standing Committee on Home Affairs (Chair: Mr. The Telecom Regulatory Authority of India (TRAI)
Brijlal) submitted its report on “Prison- Conditions, released its recommendations on: (i) promoting
Infrastructure and Reforms”.12 Key observations and networking and telecom equipment manufacturing, (ii)
recommendations of the Committee include: issues related to FM radio broadcasting sector, (iii)
augmenting telecom infrastructure in the north-eastern
▪ Overcrowding: The Committee observed that
region, and (iv) rationalisation of entry fees and bank
overcrowded prisons have serious consequences
guarantees for telecom licensees.13,14,15,16 Key
for both prisoners and the criminal justice system.
observations and recommendations are:
The national average occupancy rate in prisons
across India is 130%. Six states, including Uttar ▪ Manufacturing: TRAI recommended that
Pradesh, Bihar, and Madhya Pradesh account for domestic value addition in the manufacturing of
more than half of the total prisoner population. networking and telecom equipment should be a
Four out of these six states have an occupancy rate key objective. To promote domestic
higher than the national average. The Committee manufacturing, its key recommendations include:
recommended transferring prisoners from (i) extending PLI scheme for component
overcrowded jails to other jails within the same manufacturing, (ii) incentivising telecom service
state or in other states by signing a Memorandum providers to buy domestically made equipment,
of Understanding. (iii) providing capital subsidy for manufacturing
facilities and interest subvention to MSMEs, (iv)
▪ The Committee noted that bail is typically denied
establishing a dedicated venture capital fund for
as the undertrial prisoner may: (i) influence or
startups in telecom manufacturing, (v) introducing
intimidate witnesses, (ii) try to flee the country, or
tax incentives for investment in R&D, and (vi)
(iii) commit another crime. It observed that the
treating telecom software as independent
bracelet/anklet tracker technology, as implemented
deliverables and extending incentives for export
in Odisha, could be a cost-effective method for
and domestic manufacturing for their development.
monitoring prisoners who are out on bail.
However, as it may raise human rights concerns,
the Committee suggested using the method after
▪ FM Radio broadcasting: For FM radio
securing consent from the inmates.
broadcasting sector, it recommended: (i) charging
▪ Young offenders: The Committee noted that there license fee as 4% of gross revenue (after excluding
is a lack of clarity on who is a young offender GST), (ii) allowing private radio channels to run
across states. It recommended that the Ministry of their own news bulletins, (currently, they are
- 5-
Monthly Policy Review – September 2023 PRS Legislative Research
allowed to only air bulletin from All India Radio), addressing factors affecting digital inclusion such
and (iii) mandating that FM radio-receivers are as digital connectivity, digital affordability and
enabled and activated on mobile phones equipped digital literacy, (ii) additional measures or the
with necessary hardware. expansion of current schemes to achieve universal
connectivity, (iii) methods to ensure affordability
▪ Infrastructure in the north-eastern region:
of digital services and digital literacy, and (iv)
TRAI observed that the north-eastern region
ensuring connectivity for MSMEs.
suffers from poor digital connectivity. To improve
this scenario, it made several recommendations. ▪ Formulating National Broadcasting Policy:
These include: (i) harmonising local right of way TRAI has sought views on broad issues in the
rules with the rules framed by the central broadcasting sector for developing a new National
government, (ii) providing electricity to telecom Broadcasting Policy. Key areas for consultation
sites on a priority basis, (iii) utilising Universal include: (i) the requirement, relevance and review
Service Obligation Fund (USOF) to fund of public service broadcasting, (ii) simplification
infrastructure development projects, and (iv) of the policy and regulatory framework for
identifying uncovered villages regardless of different types of broadcasting systems, (iii) a
population for providing 4G connectivity. The framework for systematic and legal redressal of
USOF allows for setting up digital infrastructure in piracy and copyright, and (iv) the need for a
remote areas for access to digital services. separate regulator for broadcasting.
▪ Entry fees and bank guarantees: Currently, ▪ 5G Ecosystem: 5G has enabled extremely fast
unified license is issued to the telecom operators, data transfer speeds. Thus, it has the potential to
under which service-wise authorisations are given. become a platform of its own, supporting emerging
Licensees need to pay an entry fee (one-time non- technologies such as virtual reality (VR) and
refundable fee) and provide bank guarantees (a artificial intelligence (AI). The consultation paper
financial instrument to ensure the licensee pays its has sought inputs on enabling such an ecosystem.
dues to the government) for various authorisations. Key issues for consultation include: (i) need for
TRAI recommended to bring down these levies. any additional measures to strengthen the
Key recommendations include: (i) reducing the development and adoption of 5G, (ii) policy
entry fees for authorisations, (ii) eliminating entry measures needed to promote the use of 5G, (iii)
fees for renewal of license, and (iii) using e-bank creation of policies to promote VR, AI, and drones,
guarantees for ease of doing business. and (iv) measures needed for promoting startups
and R&D in such technologies.
TRAI seeks public feedback on several subjects
Last dates for consultations are mentioned below:
The Telecom Regulatory Authority of India (TRAI)
▪ Encouraging R&D in telecom, broadcasting and
issued consultation papers on: (i) encouraging R&D in
IT: October 23, 2023,
telecom, broadcasting and IT, (ii) digital inclusion in
▪ Digital inclusion in the era of emerging
the era of emerging technologies, (iii) inputs for
technologies: October 16, 2023,
drafting of the National Broadcasting Policy, and (iv)
▪ Inputs for formulation of National Broadcasting
use of 5G for augmenting digital ecosystems.17,18,19,20
Policy: October 10, 2023,
Subjects on which inputs have been sought include:
▪ Digital transformation through 5G ecosystem:
▪ Research and development: Spending on R&D October 30, 2023.
in India is lower than the world average. India
spent 0.7% of its GDP on R&D in 2017-18, which
is lower than the world average of 1.8% of GDP
It invited comments on following key issues: (i)
Consumer Affairs
adequacy of the education system at all levels for
promoting R&D, (ii) whether the current network Pratinav Damani (pratinav@prsindia.org)
of public and private institutions involved in R&D
is adequate, (iii) issues with the current regulatory Comments invited on guidelines for regulating
framework for R&D, especially in the field of
dark patterns in e-commerce
intellectual property rights, and (iv) changes
required in existing laws/policies to align with The Ministry of Consumer Affairs invited comments
global leaders. on the Draft Guidelines for Prevention and Regulation
of Dark Patterns, 2023.21 Dark patterns refer to
▪ Digital inclusion: TRAI observed that India has
practices or deceptive design patterns in user interfaces
seen growth in the adoption of digital services.
(UI) of platforms, designed to mislead or trick users
However, there is wide variation in the usage of
into performing unintended actions. These patterns
internet and broadband services across different
impair consumer autonomy, decision making or choice,
sections of society. Key issues on which
and amount to misleading or unfair trade practices.
comments are invited include: (i) need for
Key features of the draft guidelines include:
- 6-
Monthly Policy Review – September 2023 PRS Legislative Research
▪ Engaging in dark patterns prohibited: The ▪ Operationalisation of national waterways:
guidelines prohibit engaging in any dark patterns. There are 111 notified national waterways, out of
These will apply to: (i) all platforms offering which 23 have been made operational. The
goods or services in India, (ii) advertisers, and (iii) Ministry of Ports, Shipping, and Waterways stated
sellers. The Central Consumer Protection that the development of 63 national waterways has
Authority (CCPA), established under the not taken up due to financial and staffing
Consumer Protection Act, 2019 will be responsible constraints. The Committee also recommended
for settling ambiguities or disputes related to the against taking up development of these 63
interpretation of dark patterns.22 Under the Act, waterways at present, as they are unviable.
failure to comply with the direction of the CCPA is
▪ The Committee noted that five national waterways
punishable with imprisonment up to six months, a
contribute to 80% of the total cargo movement. It
fine of up to Rs 20 lakh, or both.22
observed that the following key factors discourage
▪ Types of dark patterns: The draft guidelines companies from shifting to inland waterways: (i)
define various dark patterns. Certain key patterns slow pace of development of waterways, (ii) poor
are listed in the table below. hinterland connectivity, and (iii) high vessel and
equipment costs. The Committee recommended
Table 2: Certain Dark Patterns
the following key measures to facilitate a modal
Pattern Description Examples
shift: (i) financial incentives to shippers, and (ii)
▪ Falsely stating or ▪ Falsely describing a the development of loading and unloading
implying the sense of sale as ‘exclusive’
▪ False Urgency facilities at terminals.
urgency or scarcity of for a limited set of
a product/service users ▪ Intermodal connectivity for cargo movement:
▪ A user orders food The Committee noted that connectivity of
▪ Inclusion of additional
online, and the food waterways with major ports, rails and roads would
items such as
delivery platform lessen the burden on these modes and reduce the
▪ Basket products or services
automatically logistics costs. It recommended that in the case of
Sneaking at the time of
includes a
checkout without the newly notified waterways, connectivity with rail,
subscription at
consent of the user road, and ports should be dealt with in the project
checkout.
planning stage itself.
▪ A platform for
▪ Using a phrase,
booking flight ▪ Low modal share of waterways: The modal
video, audio or any
tickets uses the share of waterways in India’s freight movement is
other means to create
▪ Confirm phrase ‘I will stay about 2%, whereas the corresponding figure is 4%
a sense of fear,
Shaming shame, guilt, or unsecured’ if the for USA, 14% for China, 48% for Vietnam, and
user does not add
ridicule in the mind of 49% for Netherlands. India aims to increase the
insurance to the
the consumer modal share to 5% by 2030. The Committee
cart
recommended the Ministry to come up with an
Source: Draft guidelines on Prevention and Regulation of Dark
action plan to harness the potential of waterways
Patterns; PRS
as a sustainable transit option and tourism product.
Comments are invited until October 5, 2023.
For a PRS summary see here.
Bharat New Car Assessment Programme for
assessing crash safety of cars notified
Transport
The Ministry of Road Transport and Highway notified
Priyadarshini Jain (priyadarshini@prsindia.org)
amendments to the Central Motor Vehicles Rules,
1989.24,25 The Rules have been framed under the
Standing Committee submits its report on the
provisions of the Motor Vehicles Act, 1988.26
National Inland Waterways
▪ The amendments introduce the Bharat New Car
The Standing Committee on Transport, Tourism and Assessment Program (BNCAP) for assessing the safety
Culture (Chair: Mr. V.Vijayasai Reddy) submitted its rating of vehicles under the M1 category. The M1
report on ‘Development and Expansion of Existing and category consists of cars weighing up to 3.5 tonnes and
New National Inland Waterways’.23 An Inland can carry up to eight passengers (excluding the
waterway is a navigable river and canal system. The driver).27 The vehicles will be examined and assessed
Inland Waterways Authority of India (IWAI) regulates for star rating in accordance with Automotive Industry
and develops national waterways for inland shipping Standard (AIS) 197. As per draft AIS 197 (yet to be
and navigation. Key observations and notified), the overall vehicle safety assessment will be
recommendations of the Committee include: based on: (i) adult occupant protection, (ii) child
occupant protection, and (iii) safety assist
technologies.28 The program will be applicable for
vehicles from October 1, 2023.
- 7-
Monthly Policy Review – September 2023 PRS Legislative Research
Rules to increase the validity of fitness various activities including construction and
certificates for transport vehicles notified mining are restricted under law. The Committee
observed that this invites public criticism and
The Ministry of Road Transport and Highway notified
inconvenience, as in some cases, an entire village
amendments to the Central Motor Vehicles Rules,
is covered within such radius. It recommended
1989.29,30 The Rules have been framed under the
that these restrictions should be rationalised.
provisions of the Motor Vehicles Act, 1988.31 The
1988 Act empowers the central government to For a PRS summary, see here.
prescribe rules for issuing fitness certificates to
transport vehicles. A transport vehicle is a light motor Standing Committee report on development of
vehicle, a public service vehicle, a goods carriage, an niche tourism and potential tourist spots
educational institution bus or a private service
The Standing Committee on Transport, Tourism and
vehicle.31 A fitness certificate is proof that the vehicle
Culture (Chair: Mr. V.Vijayasai Reddy) released its
is safe and fit for use on the road
report on “Development of Niche Tourism (including
Under the 1989 Rules, the validity of the fitness Spiritual Tourism), Theme-based Tourist Circuits and
certificate for old transport vehicles was one year. The Potential Tourist Spots”.34 Niche tourism caters to
Amendments increase the validity period to two years small groups of people sharing similar interests. It
for vehicles up to eight years old. Only automated includes: (i) rural tourism, (ii) adventure tourism, (iii)
testing stations should issue fitness certificates for: (i) eco-tourism, and (iv) medical tourism.
heavy goods vehicles, (ii) heavy passenger motor
▪ Rural tourism: The Committee observed that no
vehicles, (iii) medium goods vehicles, and (iv) light
Indian village features in the list of the best
motor. The new rules will apply from October 1, 2024.
tourism villages prepared by the United Nations
World Tourism Organisation. It further observed
that rural tourism has immense potential for
boosting employment and income for villagers. It
Tourism recommended that the website on rural tourism
must provide details of rural homestays, travel
Arpita Mallick (arpita@prsindia.org) connectivity, and tourist spots in villages.
Standing Committee submits report on ▪ Adventure tourism: The Committee observed
that there has been an increase in the number of
functioning of Archaeological Survey of India
accidents in adventure sports. It noted the
The Standing Committee on Transport, Tourism and presence of unlicensed adventure tour operators.
Culture (Chair: Mr. V.Vijayasai Reddy) submitted its The Committee recommended that the Ministry of
report on ‘Functioning of Archaeological Survey of Tourism should enact a law so that only licensed
India”.32 The Archaeological Survey of India (ASI) is operators provide adventure tourism services.
a body set up by the central government for
▪ Medical tourism: The Committee observed that
maintenance of ancient monuments of national
lack of regulations in the medical travel sector
importance. It also regulates archaeological activities
affects monitoring of the quality of services
in the country. Key observations and recommendations
offered. They recommended all medical tourism
of the Committee include:
facilitators to mandatorily register with the
▪ Rationalisation of the list of centrally protected government. It also recommended the Ministry to
monuments: The Committee observed that at encourage hospitals to obtain the Joint
least a quarter of the 3,691 centrally protected Commission International accreditation as it is
monuments are minor monuments with no recognised on an international level.
architectural or historical significance. Centrally
▪ Swadesh Darshan scheme: Under the scheme, 15
protected monuments are notified under the
thematic circuits have been identified. 76 projects
Ancient Monuments and Archaeological Sites and
have been sanctioned in 31 states/UTs for the
Remains Act, 1958.33 The Committee
development of tourism infrastructure. The
recommended that the list of these monuments be
Committee noted that several projects are delayed
rationalised based on national significance, unique
due to lack of approvals from temple or forest
architectural value, and specific heritage content.
authorities. It recommended monitoring the real
It also observed that 50 centrally protected
time progress of the projects.
monuments remain untraceable or are affected by
rapid urbanisation. It recommended the ASI to
ensure the physical security of all monuments
maintained by it. It identified lack of personnel to
be a key gap in ensuring security.
▪ Restricted areas around monuments: Within
the radius of 300 metres of archaeological sites,
- 8-
Monthly Policy Review – September 2023 PRS Legislative Research
Power ▪ Change in definition of captive users: The
amendment broadens the scope of entities
considered to be captive users. Previously, the
Framework for promoting energy storage
Rules specified that affiliate companies (in which
systems released
the captive user held at least 51% ownership)
Pratinav Damani (pratinav@prsindia.org) would be considered as captive users. The
amended Rules have replaced the term affiliate
The Ministry of Power released the National company with holding company which is defined
Framework for Promoting Energy Storage Systems.35 in the Companies Act, 2013.39 A holding company
As electricity generation from renewable sources varies owns subsidiary companies in which: (i) it controls
significantly, energy storage systems are used to store the composition of the board of directors or (ii) it
any surplus generation for ensuring reliable supply. controls more than half of the voting power.39
India targets to have 50% cumulative installed capacity
▪ Verification of certain captive generation
from non-fossil energy sources by 2030. Energy
plants: The amendment requires that the captive
storage systems will be crucial for integration of
status of certain generating plants shall be verified
renewable energy capacity at this scale. The
by the Central Electricity Authority. This only
framework recommends following key measures:
applies to generating plants in which the captive
▪ Regulatory measures: To ensure the financial user(s) and its captive generating plant are located
and commercial viability of energy storage in more than one state.
systems, certain regulatory measures have been
proposed. These include: (i) framing power Draft amendments to tariff regulations
purchase guidelines to incentivise energy storage released for public feedback
systems, and (ii) providing energy storage systems
Priyadarshini Jain (priyadarshini@prsindia.org)
with carbon credits where they utilise renewable
energy for charging. New renewable energy
The Central Electricity Regulatory Commission
projects over 5 megawatts should be required to
(CERC) released draft amendments to the CERC
install energy storage systems for at least 5% of
(Terms and Conditions of Tariff) Regulations,
their renewable energy capacity.
2019.40,41 These Regulations have been framed under
▪ Financial incentives: Viability gap funding up to the Electricity Act, 2003.42 The 2019 Regulations
40% of the capital cost for the battery energy govern tariffs for central generators, generators having
storage systems should be provided (provided that composite schemes of sale to more than one state, and
the project is commissioned within 18-24 months). inter-state transmission systems.
PLI scheme should be formulated for incentivising
Commercial exchange between a generation company
domestic manufacturing of energy storage systems
and a distribution company is governed through long-
and ancillary components. The framework also
term power purchase agreements (PPAs). PPAs are
proposes waiver of stamp duty and registration
typically up to 25 years long, which is also the
fees for land used to set up energy storage systems.
specified useful life of thermal generating stations
▪ Technology-agnostic bidding: The competitive under the Regulations. CERC observed that plants may
bidding guidelines for projects should not give continue to function after their specified useful life.
preferential treatment to certain technologies. Hence, the 2019 Regulations provide that the
generation company and the distribution company may
▪ Recycling and sustainability: All bidding
re-enter an agreement after the completion of the useful
documents should have an end-of-life management
life. The distribution company has the first right of
plan. These plans should promote repurposing or
refusal to such an arrangement.
reusing old batteries.
The draft Regulations propose to remove the provision
Rules on captive power generators and users for mutual arrangement after the useful life of a thermal
amended power plant. CERC observed that such mandates
through regulations may not be desirable, as it may
Pratinav Damani (pratinav@prsindia.org) violate contractual sanctity and could be inequitable.43
The Ministry of Power notified amendments to the
Electricity Rules, 2005.36,37 The Rules have been
framed under the Electricity Act, 2003, which regulates
licences and tariffs for power.38 A captive generation
plant is a power plant set up for one’s own use. The
amendments require the verification of certain captive
generation plants and alter the definition of captive
users. Key features of the amended Rules include:
- 9-
Monthly Policy Review – September 2023 PRS Legislative Research
Mining waste. The amendment adds extended producer
responsibility (EPR) to manage used oil, which requires
Mandvi Gaur (mandvi@prsindia.org) producers to recycle such used oil. Used oil refers to
oil derived from crude oil or mixtures containing
Rules for auction of mining lease and synthetic oil, and oils suitable for reprocessing. The
composite license amended EPR applies to producers who manufacture and/or sell
base oil/ lubrication oil. Key features of the
The Ministry of Mines notified amendments to the
amendments include:
Mineral (Auction) Rules, 2015.44,45 The Rules have
been framed under the Mines and Minerals ▪ Management of used oil: As per the amended
(Development and Regulation) Act, 1957.46 The Act Rules, used oil will be managed through: (i)
regulates the mining sector in India. The 2015 Rules producing re-refined base oil/lubrication oil (ii)
prescribe the procedure of conducting auction of mines. energy recovery, i.e., utilising used oil as fuel. Re-
Key features of the amended Rules include: refining refers to removing impurities from used
oil to produce base oil/ lubrication oil.
▪ Concessions for critical and strategic minerals:
The amended Rules introduce certain requirements ▪ EPR targets: It is now the responsibility of the
for the state government with regard to producer to recycle used oil through registered
concessions for critical and strategic minerals. recyclers to ensure environmentally sound
These minerals are specified in the First Schedule management of used oil. The Rules specify targets
of the Act, and include lithium- bearing minerals based on yearly sales/imports of base
and graphite. The state government must intimate oil/lubrication oil to fulfil these obligations.
the central government about: (i) the details of Producers may take help of third-party
areas available for grant of composite license or organisations, such as dealers to meet the targets.
mining lease within 45 days of the notification of The import of used oil is permitted for re-refining
the Rules, (ii) the receipt of geological survey only. Used oil importers will be required to fulfil
reports for auction of composite license within 45 these obligations for100% of the used oil imported
days of the receipt of report, and (iii) termination in the previous year.
or lapse of mining lease/composite license, within
▪ Producer responsibility certificates: Producers
15 days of such an event.
may fulfil their EPR by purchasing certificates
▪ Classification of land: Under the 2015 Rules, the from registered recyclers of used oil. Recycling
state government may hold an auction for granting refers to re-refining used oil or energy recovery
a mining lease in an area with established mineral from used oil. Certificates can also be purchased
contents.47 Before the auction, the state based on the producer’s current and previous
government must identify and mark the area using years’ liability.
surveying equipment. The area should be
▪ Registration: The amendments mandate
categorised as: (i) forest land, (ii) land owned by
producers, collection agents, recyclers, and used
the state government, and (iii) land not owned by
oil importers to register themselves with the
the state government. The amended Rules provide
Central Pollution Control Board (CPCB).
that for this purpose, state governments may use
land details available in: (i) portal of the Prime ▪ Non-compliance: In case of non-fulfilment of
Minister Gati Shakti, (ii) land record portal of the obligations, environmental compensation can be
state government, or (iii) records of any other imposed by CPCB. Entities can be prosecuted for
government authority. furnishing false information. The Rules also
establish a Steering Committee, headed by the
CPCB Chairperson, to oversee implementation.
Environment
Mandvi Gaur (mandvi@prsindia.org) Education
Extended Producer Responsibility Rules for Rutvik Upadhyaya (rutvik@prsindia.org)
used oil notified
Standing Committee submits report on
The Ministry of Environment, Forest and Climate
implementation of NEP in Higher Education
Change notified amendments to the Hazardous and
Other Wastes (Management and Transboundary The Standing Committee on Education, Women,
Movement) Rules, 2016.48,49 The Rules have been Children, Youth Affairs and Sports (Chair: Mr. Vivek
framed under the Environment Protection Act, 1986.50 Thakur) submitted its report on the ‘Implementation of
The Rules were enacted to reduce hazardous waste the National Education Policy, 2020 in Higher
generation and set up measures for recycling such Education’.51 The National Education Policy (NEP),
- 10-
Monthly Policy Review – September 2023 PRS Legislative Research
2020 outlines revisions in the structure and objectives and state governments have also included shops, hotels,
of India’s education system. These include introducing cinemas, newspaper establishments, and port trusts
a five-stage design for the school system and under their purview. The Act establishes the
encouraging multidisciplinary education. Observations Employees State Insurance Corporation (ESIC) and
and recommendations of the Committee include: Employees State Insurance Scheme (ESI Scheme).
Key observations and recommendations of the
▪ Interdisciplinary and personalised learning:
Committee include:
The Committee appreciated the steps taken by
Jammu and Kashmir in implementing the NEP. It ▪ Revision of wage limit for coverage under the
noted the ‘Design your Degree’ programme ESI scheme: Employees earning up to Rs 176 per
launched by Jammu University, which is based on day are exempted from paying contributions. The
the Choice-Based Credit System outlined in the Committee noted that this ceiling has remained
NEP. The programme offers students the choice to unchanged for about seven years. The Committee
pursue interdisciplinary and personalised learning. recommended that the Ministry of Labour and
The Committee recommended introducing this Employment should revise provisions related to
programme in other institutions. coverage and contribution of wages.
▪ Digital libraries: The Committee observed that ▪ Expansion of coverage of scheme: The ESI Act,
digital libraries can provide students and educators 1948 has been subsumed in the Code on Social
convenient access to a vast range of learning Security, 2020. The Code is yet to be enforced and
resources. It recommended the Department of final rules are yet to be notified. The Committee
Higher Education to ensure the availability of noted that with the implementation of the Code,
content in regional languages for better reach and ESI will expand to include: (i) voluntary coverage
learning outcomes. for establishments with less than 10 persons, (ii)
mandatory coverage for establishments engaged in
▪ Marginalised students: The Committee noted a
a hazardous occupation, and (iii) provisions for
gap between the GER of students from SC and ST
formulating special schemes for unorganised
communities and the overall GER, between 2016-
workers, gig workers, and platform workers. The
17 to 2020-21. For instance, in 2020-21, the
Committee noted the lack of readiness of the
overall GER stood at 27.3% whereas the GER for
Ministry and ESIC in providing the extended
SC students was 23.1% and for ST students, it was
coverage. It recommended carrying out
at 18.9%. The Committee recommended specific
comprehensive surveys, data collection, and use of
measures to further improve higher educational
Aadhaar to identify eligible insured persons.
access for students hailing from these marginalised
communities. These include: (i) conducting For a PRS summary, see here.
targeted awareness campaigns, (ii) developing
infrastructure in remote areas and urban slums, (iii)
providing specialised training for teachers working
in marginalised communities, and (iv) offering
Electronics & IT
scholarships suited to the needs of marginalised
communities. It also recommended putting in Mandvi Gaur (mandvi@prsindia.org)
place a transparent and efficient hiring process for
teachers that prioritises diversity. Comments invited on the Draft National
Strategy on Robotics
The Ministry of Electronics and Information
Technology released the draft of ‘National Strategy for
Labour and Employment
Robotics’ for public feedback.54 It seeks to promote
adoption of robotic technology in India. It has
Priyadarshini Jain (priyadarshini@prsindia.org)
identified following as key challenges in leveraging
robotics for India: (i) heavy reliance on imports, (ii)
Standing Committee submits report on the
lack of skilled human resources, (iii) high costs, and
Employees State Insurance Corporation
(iv) limited governance mechanisms. The strategy
The Standing Committee on Labour, Textiles and Skill identifies manufacturing, healthcare, agriculture, and
Development (Chair: Mr. Bhartruhari Mahtab) national security as priority sectors for adoption of
submitted its report on ‘The Employees State Insurance robotics for India. Key recommendations include:
Corporation - Applicability and Benefits under ESI
▪ Steps to improve domestic capabilities: The
Scheme, Functioning of ESI Hospitals and
draft strategy recommends a four-pillar approach
Management of Corpus Fund’.52 The Employees State
to improve India’s domestic capabilities in the
Insurance Act, 1948 mandates employers to contribute
robotics innovation lifecycle.
towards medical care to employees.53 It applies to
factories employing at least 10 persons. The central
- 11-
Monthly Policy Review – September 2023 PRS Legislative Research
Table 3: Key recommended interventions 7. Creation of Adarsh Grams under Saansad Adarsh Gram
▪ Pillar ▪ Interventions Yojana (SAGY).
8. Review of functioning of National Institute of Rural
▪ Research and ▪ Setting up centres of
Development and Panchayati Raj (NIRD&PR).
development excellence for research,
9. Role of Banks in the financial inclusion of rural population.
funding exploratory research
10. Active participation of Members of Parliament in monitoring
to establish leadership
through DISHA Committees.
▪ Demonstration ▪ establishing robotics 11. Holistic approach to Sustainable Rural Development.
and testing innovation testbeds to
assess technology readiness Department of Land Resources
▪ Commercialisation ▪ fiscal incentives for domestic 1. Implementation of Digital India Land Records
of innovation and production and exports, Modernization Programme (DILRMP).
supply chain policies to encourage
development startups, skilling programs Ministry of Panchayati Raj
▪ Adoption and ▪ demand-side interventions 1. SVAMITVA (Survey of Villages Abadi and Mapping with
awareness including public procurement, Improvised Technology in Village Areas Scheme).
formulation of technology 2. Implementation of Rashtriya Gram Swaraj Abhiyan
adoption plans, and robot (RGSA).
utilisation strategies 3. Status of Digitization of Gram Panchayats.
Source: Draft on National Strategy for Robotics; PRS
Transport, Tourism and Culture
▪ Institutional framework: A National Robotics
1. Operation and Maintenance of National Highways and
Mission should be established which will work
Management of Toll Plazas.
towards encouraging collaboration between 2. (Review of Progress of e-Mobility Infrastructure and Growth
industry, academia, and start-ups. Robotics of e-Vehicles.
Innovation Unit should be set up within the 3. Encroachment on Right of Way (RoW) and Unauthorised
Ministry of Electronics and IT. The unit is Access on National Highways.
envisioned as a pivotal entity responsible for 4. Review of Implementation of UDAN Scheme and Advanced
Landing Grounds.
nurturing innovation, facilitating technology
5. New International Airports: Concerns of Economic Viability
development, and driving adoption. Its functions
and Prospects.
encompass identifying viable use cases for
6. National Mission on Cultural Mapping and Roadmap, and
robotics, advancing R&D in robotics, supporting
welfare of local artistes.
startup ventures, strengthening the supply chain, 7. Status of Ship building, Ship Repair and Ship breaking
and simplifying market access. A network of industries in the Country.
centres of excellence may be established to 8. Improvement of Maritime Education and Training Facilities.
undertake research. 9. Examination of Draft National Tourism Policy.
Comments are invited until October 31, 2023. Labour, Textiles and Skill Development
Ministry of Labour and Employment
1. Implementation of the Labour Codes.
2. Working Conditions and Welfare Measures for Mine
Annexure Workers, including Unauthorised Mines and assessment of
working of Directorate General of Mines Safety (DGMS).
The subjects identified by various Parliamentary 3. Contractual Appointments/Deployments and
Implementation of Labour Laws concerning the welfare of
Standing Committees for examination are given below
Contract/Casual Workers in Government
in the table below.
Organisations/Public Sector Undertakings/Public Sector
Table 4: Subjects identified by the Standing Banks/Establishments.
Committees for examination during 2023-24 4. Implementation of Welfare measures for Plantation
Workers.
Rural Development and Panchayati Raj
5. Functioning of the Employees Provident Fund Organisation
Ministry of Rural Development: (EPFO) with special reference to operation of the EPF
Pension Scheme and Management of Corpus Fund.
Department of Rural Development
6. Functioning of Central Board for Workers Education.
1. Impact of National Social Assistance Programme (NSAP) 7. Implementation of Centrally Sponsored Schemes.
on the poor and destitute in the villages. 8. National Policy on Child Labour – An assessment.
2. Realization of the vision 'Make in India' under Deen Dayal 9. Identification and Rehabilitation of Bonded Labour.
Upadhyaya Grameen Kaushalya Yojana (DDU-GKY). 10. Implementation of prescribed minimum Wages in various
3. Empowering rural women through Deendayal Antyodaya Employment Sectors.
Yojana - National Rural Livelihoods Mission (DAY-NRLM). 11. Social Security and Welfare Measures to provide old age
4. Rural Employment through Mahatma Gandhi National protection to Unorganised/ Informal Sector Workers
Rural Employment Guarantee Act (MGNREGA) – An including Gig/Scheme Workers, Street Vendors, Stone
insight into wage rates and other matters relating thereto. Crushers, Fishermen and Workers in IT and
5. Housing for All – Status of PMAY-G. Telecommunication Sectors
6. Review of the progress made under Pradhan Mantri Gram
Sadak Yojana (PMGSY).
- 12-
Monthly Policy Review – September 2023 PRS Legislative Research
12. Safeguards and measures for protecting the interest of Chemicals and Fertilizers
overseas contract workers and the Returnees, particularly
Ministry of Chemicals and Fertilizers:
in the Middle East Region.
13. Employment Generation Programmes - A Review. Department of Fertilizers
Ministry of Textiles 1. Matters pertaining to disinvestment of fertilizer PSUs -A
review.
1. Development and Promotion of Jute Industry.
2. Initiatives for ensuring growth of domestic fertilizer industry.
2. Skill Development vis-à-vis Manufacturing and Upgradation
3. Fertilizer Projects and joint ventures for ensuring availability
in Textiles Sector.
of fertilizers and raw materials.
3. Challenges/Opportunities in Indian Textile Industry.
4. Evaluation of performance of fertilizer producing PSUs.
4. Development of Cotton Sector.
5. Availability and distribution of Fertilizers.
5. Schemes/Programmes of Central Silk Board for
Development and Promotion of Silk Industry. Department of Chemicals and Petrochemicals
6. Status/Performance of Handloom Sector.
1. Vision 2024 - To establish India as a leading manufacturer
7. Status and Reforming of Powerloom Sector.
of chemicals and petrochemicals by initiating measures
8. Performance of Marketing Agencies of Handlooms and
including, inter-alia, revival of sick units.
Handicrafts.
2. Insecticides & Pesticides – promotion and development
9. Functioning of National Textile Corporation (NTC).
including safe usage - licensing regime for insecticides.
Ministry of Skill Development and Entrepreneurship 3. Contribution of CIPET for growth of Plastic Industry in the
country.
1. National Skills Qualifications Framework – An Assessment.
4. Factors impacting Dye-stuffs and dye intermediates
2. Functioning of National Skill Development Corporation
industry.
(NSDC).
5. Disposal of toxic waste from Bhopal Gas Leak site.
3. Implementation of Skill Acquisition and Knowledge
6. Setting up of Plastic Waste Management Centres.
Awareness for Livelihood Promotion (SANKALP) Project.
4. Skill Training in Food Processing, Agriculture and Allied Department of Pharmaceuticals
Sectors.
1. Promotion of Medical Device Industry.
Energy 2. Establishing uninterrupted growth of the Pharmaceutical
Industry while ensuring quality control and safety
Ministry of Power
standards.
1. Energy Security in India – Emerging Scenario. 3. Self-sufficiency in production and availability of Active
2. Energy Transition and Sustainability. Pharmaceutical ingredients (API) through various initiatives
3. Electrification of Rural India – Targets and Achievements. including Production Linked Incentive Scheme (PLI).
4. Energy Efficiency and Conservation. 4. Construction of Campuses for National Institute of
5. Prospects of Thermal Power Plants in the light of enhanced Pharmaceuticals Education and Research (NIPER).
Renewable Energy Target.
6. Performance Review of Major Hydro Projects. Defence
7. Evaluation of Power Transmission Sector – Development of 1. Review of strategic operational preparedness of Defence
Transmission Network and its Management. Forces in view of current security scenario including Border
8. Revamped Distribution Sector Scheme. Security.
9. Role of Power Sector Statutory Bodies, PSUs and 2. A review of working of Defence Research and
Institutions in Development of Power Sector. Development Organisation (DRDO).
10. Promotion of Electric Vehicles in India. 3. A review of functioning of Zila Sainik Boards in the Country.
4. Role of Indian Army in ensuring defence of the Country.
Ministry of New and Renewable Energy
5. Role of Indian Navy in ensuring Maritime Security of the
1. Roadmap for achievement of 50% cumulative electric Country.
power installed capacity from non-fossil fuel-based energy 6. Review of working of Indian Coast Guard in ensuring
resources by 2030. Coastal Security in the Country.
2. Pradhan Mantri Kisan Urja Suraksha Evam Utthaan 7. Role of Armed Forces Medical Services in providing
Mahabhiyan (PM-KUSUM) – An Evaluation. healthcare facilities to soldiers deployed in difficult and far-
3. Evaluation of Roof-top Solar Programme. flung border areas.
4. Bio-Energy and Waste to Energy - Recovery of Energy 8. Modernization of Defence Public Sector Undertakings
from Urban, Industrial and Agricultural Wastes/Residues (DPSUs).
and role of Urban Local Bodies in Energy Management. 9. Preparedness/Restructuring of the Armed Forces in view of
5. Production Linked Incentive Scheme: National Programme Hybrid Warfare including cyber threat and Anti-Drone
on High Efficiency Solar PV Modules. capabilities.
6. Greening of Indian Islands – Carbon Free Lakshadweep 10. Assessment of Indigenous Defence Production both by way
and Andaman and Nicobar Islands. of Public and Private Sector including major Research
7. Research, Design and Development in Renewable Energy Initiatives.
Sector. 11. Consolidation of defence lands by Defence Estates
8. Efficacy of Priority Sector Lending in financing Renewable Organisation and working of Cantonment Boards.
Energy Sector. 12. Review of working of Border Roads Organization (BRO) in
creating infrastructure in strategic locations and border
areas.
13. Status of upgradation of various programmes and projects
of Defence Research and Development Organisation
(DRDO).
- 13-
Monthly Policy Review – September 2023 PRS Legislative Research
14. A review of resettlement policies, healthcare facilities and
pensionary avenues for Ex-Servicemen (ESM).
6. Measures for Abatement of Pollution due to Mining
15. Review of Sainik Schools, Rashtriya Indian Military College
Activities and Environmental Protection - Chittorgarh Fort, a
(RIMC) and Rashtriya Military Schools.
case study.
16. Restructuring of Military commands for optimal utilization of
7. Self-reliance in Minerals and Metals.
resources such as procurement, training and staffing for the
8. Science and Technology Programme and Autonomous
Services.
Bodies.
17. A review of Agnipath Scheme in the Armed Forces.
9. CSR activities in PSUs under the purview of Ministry of
Petroleum and Natural Gas Mines.
10. Implementation of District Mineral Foundation(DMF) and
1. Pricing, Marketing and Supply of Petroleum Products and
Pradhan Mantri Khanij Kshetra Kalyan Yojana (PMKKKY) -
Natural Gas.
A Review.
2. Contract Management and Transparency in Procurement
Procedures in Oil PSUs. Ministry of Steel
3. Litigations involving Oil PSUs.
1. Review of Steel Policy and its Impact on Development of
4. Oil Refineries - A Review.
Steel Sector.
5. Review of Human Resource Policy of Oil PSUs;
2. Major Policy changes assisting Secondary Steel Sector.
6. CSR activities of oil PSUs.
3. Management of Energy efficiency by Steel Plants and
7. Review of Policy on Import of Crude Oil.
Environmental Issues related to Iron Ore Mining.
8. Initiatives undertaken by Oil PSUs in Petroleum Sector
4. Development of Manganese Ore Industry in India.
under ‘Atmanirbhar Bharat’.
5. Promotion of Steel Usage.
9. Steps taken to reduce Import Dependence of Crude Oil.
6. Status of Greenfield and Brownfield Projects of Steel PSUs.
10. Review of on-going projects in Oil PSUs including CGD
7. Iron Ore Handling Infrastructure at Ports.
Projects.
8. CSR activities in PSUs under the purview of Ministry of
11. Review of Exploration & Production Activities of Oil PSUs.
Steel.
12. R&D activities by Oil PSUs.
13. Net - Zero initiatives by Oil PSUs.
Agriculture, Animal Husbandry and Food Processing
14. Safety, Security and Environmental issues in Petroleum
Sector. Ministry of Agriculture and Farmers Welfare:
15. Exploration for, and exploitation of petroleum resources,
Department of Agriculture and Farmers Welfare
including natural gas and Coal Bed Methane, gas hydrates
and shale Gas. 1. Production and Availability of Certified Seeds in the
Country.
Coal, Mines and Steel 2. Functioning of Agricultural Credit System in the Country.
Ministry of Coal 3. Production and Availability of Oil seeds and Pulses in the
Country.
1. Land Acquisition and issues of Rehabilitation & 4. National Mission on Agricultural Extension and Technology.
Resettlement in Coal/Lignite Mining Areas. 5. Promotion of Climate Resilient Farming.
2. Research and Development in Coal Sector.
3. Future of Coal in India's Energy Mix. Department of Agricultural Research and Education
4. Review of Coal Mines Workers Welfare Programme;
1. Contribution of ICAR in Agricultural Research for Tribal and
5. Safety in Coal Mines.
Hilly Regions.
6. Production of Coal and Lignite - Projection and Planning.
2. Research and Development in Post-Harvest Management.
7. Skill development in Coal/Lignite Sector.
3. Central Island Agricultural Research Institute, Port Blair - A
8. Performance of Coal Controller's Office.
Performance Review.
9. Implementation of Information Technology and vigilance
4. Role and Performance Appraisal of Krishi Vigyan Kendras
activities to curb illegal Coal Mining and theft of coal in the
(KVKs) in the Country.
country.
10. Compliance of Environmental Norms by Coal/Lignite Ministry of Fisheries, Animal Husbandry and Dairying:
Companies.
Department of Animal Husbandry and Dairying
11. Performance of Coal Mines Provident Fund Organisation
(CMPFO). 1. Evaluation of Livestock Insurance Schemes.
12. Coal Distribution and Marketing – A Review. 2. National Livestock Mission – An Appraisal.
13. CSR activities in PSUs under the purview of Ministry of 3. Role of National Dairy Development Board for Protection
Coal. and Development of Indigenous Cattle Breeds.
4. Spread of Lumpy Skin Disease in Cattle in the Country and
Ministry of Mines
issues related therewith.
1. Mineral Exploration Activities in North Eastern States and 5. Scope for Nutrition and Livelihood in the Dairy Sector - An
its overall impact on development of the region. Analysis.
2. Measures to curb Illegal Mining of Iron Ore, Manganese
Department of Fisheries
and Bauxite in the Country.
3. Organizational Structure and Performance of Geological 1. Employment Generation and Revenue Earning Potential of
Survey of India (GSI)– A Review. Fisheries Sector.
4. Organizational Structure and Performance of Indian Bureau 2. Role of National Fisheries Development Board (NFDB) in
of Mines (IBM) – A Review. Training and Extension Facilities to Fishermen under
5. Expediting and Simplifying the Environment and Forest Pradhan Mantri Matsya Sampada Yojana.
Clearance Process for Mining Projects. 3. Development of Deep Sea Fishing.
- 14-
Monthly Policy Review – September 2023 PRS Legislative Research
Communications and Information Technology
4. Infrastructure and Post-Harvest Management in Fisheries Ministry of Information and Broadcasting
Sector - An Overview.
1. Review of functioning of Prasar Bharati Organization.
5. Promotion and Development of Sea Weed Cultivation.
2. Review of functioning and outreach of Doordarshan
6. Development and Modernization of Fishing Harbours.
Channels.
Ministry of Food Processing Industries 3. Community Radio Stations: Growth, Opportunities and
Challenges.
1. Scheme for Creation / Expansion of Food Processing and 4. Review of working of PSUs under the Ministry of
Preservation Capacities – An Evaluation. Information and Broadcasting.
2. Initiatives taken in the Food Processing Sector under 5. Working of All India Radio (AIR).
“Make in India” Program. 6. Emergence of OTT Platforms and related issues.
3. Scope for development of Food Processing Industries in 7. Overview of Film Industry.
the North Eastern Region. 8. Norms and Guidelines for Media Coverage.
4. Research and Development (R&D) in the Food Processing 9. Review of functioning of Bureau of Outreach and
Sector. Communication (BOC).
10. Review of functioning of Press Information Bureau (PIB).
Ministry of Cooperation
11. Review of functioning of Registrar of Newspapers for India
1. Formulation of New Schemes and Programmes for the (RNI).
Development of Cooperative Societies in the Country. 12. Evaluation of Target Rating Point (TRP) mechanism and its
2. Progress in Establishment of National Cooperative related agencies in India.
Database. 13. Regulation of Cable Television in India.
Commerce Ministry of Electronics and Information Technology
1. Comprehensive Strategy to Map Major Products and 1. Digital Payment and Online Security measures for data
Countries to Maximise Exports and Minimise Imports. protection.
2. Review of Progress of National Industrial Corridors 2. Review of functioning of Unique Identification Authority of
Development Programme. India (UIDAI).
3. Implementation of PM Gati Shakti: Master Plan for Multi- 3. Safeguarding citizens’ rights and prevention of misuse of
modal Connectivity. social/online news media platforms including special
4. Performance Evaluation and Review of Commodity Boards. emphasis on women security in the digital space.
4. Promotion of Electronics/IT Hardware/telecom equipment
External Affairs
manufacturing sector under Make in India and measures
1. Countering Global Terrorism at Regional and International for reduction of imports.
Levels. 5. Review of cyber security scenario in India.
2. India’s Position in the Ongoing Climate Change 6. Review of functioning of Common Service Centre – Special
Negotiations. Purpose Vehicle (CSC-SPV).
3. QUAD in Indo-Pacific Region: Impact thereof and India’s 7. Issues related to social media domain.
Role and Strategies for Engagement and Cooperation. 8. Emergence of Artificial Intelligence and related issues.
4. India’s Role in Different Bodies of United Nations including 9. Issues related to monopolistic practices by social and
Security Council: Imperatives and Challenges for India’s digital platforms, their regulation and services provided by
Permanent Membership in UNSC. them.
5. Opportunities in African countries and India’s Engagement. 10. Safeguarding rights of independent content creators on
6. Functioning of Indian Missions Abroad including Evaluation social and digital media.
of Political/Economic/Cultural and Consular Responsibilities
and Promotion of Trade, Tourism and Technology. Ministry of Communications:
7. Performance of Passport Issuance System including
Department of Posts
Issuance of e-Passports and Review of Indian Passport Act
and Rules. 1. Real Estate Management in the Department of Posts.
8. India’s Engagement with Small Island Countries. 2. Department of Posts – Initiatives and Challenges.
9. Facilitating External Economic Engagement of States and 3. Review of services provided by Post Offices.
Union Territories.
Department of Telecommunications
10. India's Engagement with G20 Countries.
11. India’s Look East Policy: Review of India - ASEAN 1. Review of functioning of BSNL and MTNL and plan for
Partnership. enhancing their performance.
12. India and Gulf Cooperation Council (GCC) - Contours of 2. Review of the performance of schemes/projects under
Cooperation. Universal Service Obligation Fund (USOF) implemented by
13. India’s Role and Strategies for Cooperation in I2U2 (India, Private Sector.
Israel, UAE and USA) Group. 3. Review of the performance of schemes/projects under
14. Russia - Ukraine Conflict, its Global Impact and India’s Universal Service Obligation Fund (USOF) implemented by
Response thereto. Public Sector.
15. Concerns and Issues Pertaining to Indian Students 4. Review of the functioning of the National Institute of
Studying Abroad. Communication Finance (NICF).
5. Implementation of Prime Minister’s Wi-fi Access Network
Interface (PM-WANI) initiative.
6. Issues confronting Telecom Sector in India.
7. Review of Indian Telecom Industries (ITI) and its
modernization.
- 15-
Monthly Policy Review – September 2023 PRS Legislative Research
8. Inter-sectoral review of challenges of emerging and 2. Review of initiatives by UGC, AICTE, NAAC, NBA, NTA
converging technologies, entities and practices. etc. in pursuance of NEP 2020.
3. Pradhan Mantri Uchchatar Shiksha Abhiyan (PM-USHA)--
Water Resources roadmap for effective implementation.
Ministry of Jal Shakti: 4. Review of Management, Sports and Social Work Education
in the country.
Department of Water Resources, River Development and
5. Issues afflicting availability of quality faculty/ teaching
Ganga Rejuvenation
resources in the Higher Education Sector- Public/Private
1. Conservation, Development, Management and Abatement Universities.
of pollution in river Ganga and its Tributaries under 6. Anusandhan scenario in Sciences and related fields---IITs,
Namami Gange programme with particular reference to IISc, CUs.
project deliverables and timelines as well as performance
Department of School Education and Literacy
of State Governments.
2. Review of Upper Yamuna River Cleaning Project up to 1. Review of NIPUN BHARAT Scheme.
Delhi and River bed management in Delhi. 2. Implementation of the National Education Policy, 2020 in
3. Conservation and Abatement of Pollution in river Cauvery School Education sector.
and other major rivers of South India. 3. Review of Samagra Shiksha Scheme--Special emphasis on
4. Water resource management in North Eastern States. PM POSHAN.
5. Flood scenario and effectiveness of measures taken to 4. Review of National Council for Teacher Education in light of
combat excessive floods in the country. NEP 2020 thrust on Capacity Building of Teachers.
6. Interlinking of rivers to improve water availability in water
Ministry of Women and Child Development
scarce regions.
7. Water Use Efficiency in India. 1. Evaluation of Mission Shakti and Mission Vatsalya.
8. Measures Taken for Safety of Dams. 2. Review of Saksham Anganwadi and Poshan 2.0 Scheme.
9. Review of the role and working of WAPCOS and NPCC. 3. Review of Pradhan Mantri Matru Vandana Yojana.
10. Implementation of Atal Bhujal Yojana and Ground Water
Ministry of Youth Affairs and Sports:
Management in the Country.
Department of Youth Affairs
Department of Drinking Water and Sanitation
1. National Youth Policy-status and vision.
1. Review of performance of Swachh Bharat Mission - Quality
and sustainability of sanitation infrastructure created under Department of Sports
Swachh Bharat Mission and Preparedness for ODF 2.0.
2. Review of performance of Jal Jeevan Mission. 1. Review of Preparation for 2024 Paris Olympic Games –
3. Drinking Water Supply in Coastal Areas - Setting up of with focus on relationship between National Sports
Desalination Plants. federations and Department of Sports.
2. Review of Sports/Physical Education in the country and
Education, Women, Children, Youth and Sports involvement of private sector therein.
Ministry of Education: 3. PPP model for Indian sports—Sports Promotion Schemes
and methods of talent scouting and association of
Department of Higher Education corporate sector through CSR activities.
1. Internationalization of Higher Education in light of NEP
2020 Vision.
1 Developments in India’s Balance of Payments during the First 7 The Protection of Children from Sexual Offences Act, 2012,
Quarter (April-June) of 2023-24, Reserve Bank of India, September https://wcd.nic.in/sites/default/files/POCSO%20Act%2C%202012.pd
28, 2023, f.
https://rbidocs.rbi.org.in/rdocs/PressRelease/PDFs/PR10082A4F1B4 8 Section 375-376, The Indian Penal Code, 1860,
502C64872B8DDD093F7957B18.PDF. https://www.indiacode.nic.in/bitstream/123456789/2263/1/aA1860-
2 The Constitution (One Hundred and Twenty-Eighth Amendment) 45.pdf.
Bill, 2023, Lok Sabha, 9 Reserve Bank of India (Classification, Valuation and Operation of
https://sansad.in/getFile/BillsTexts/LSBillTexts/Asintroduced/124_2 Investment Portfolio of Commercial Banks) Directions, 2023,
023_LS_E919202323027PM.pdf?source=legislation. Reserve Bank of India, September 12, 2023,
3 F. NO. H-11019/03.2023-Leg.II, Resolution, Gazette of India, https://rbidocs.rbi.org.in/rdocs/notification/PDFs/104MDINVESTME
Ministry of Law and Justice, September 2, 2023, NTPORTFOLIOC6B7053A02894342A00142968C70FC82.PDF.
egazette.gov.in/WriteReadData/2023/248519.pdf. 10 Responsible Lending Conduct – Release of Movable / Immovable
4 “Cabinet approved eCourts Phase III for 4 years”, Press Information Property Documents on Repayment/ Settlement of Personal Loans,
Bureau, Ministry of Law and justice, September 13, 2023, Reserve Bank of India, September 13, 2023,
https://pib.gov.in/PressReleasePage.aspx?PRID=1956920. https://rbidocs.rbi.org.in/rdocs/notification/PDFs/NOTI60936A9DFA
5 ‘E-Courts Mission Mode Project’, Supreme Court of India, 85554DD1BF77BCF4611AA69D.PDF.
https://ecommitteesci.gov.in/project/brief-overview-of-e-courts- 11 Reserve Bank of India (Treatment of Wilful Defaulters and Large
project/. Defaulters) Directions, 2023, Reserve Bank of India, September 21,
6 Report No. 283, ‘Age of consent under the Protection of Children 2023,
from Sexual Offences Act, 2012”, Law Commission, September https://rbidocs.rbi.org.in/rdocs/Content/PDFs/DRAFTMDWILFULD
2023, EFAULTERSF5BC955D0C8B4105BB9838A9645EEE03.PDF.
https://cdnbbsr.s3waas.gov.in/s3ca0daec69b5adc880fb464895726dbd
f/uploads/2023/09/20230929466194485.pdf.
- 16-
Monthly Policy Review – September 2023 PRS Legislative Research
https://www.indiacode.nic.in/bitstream/123456789/9460/1/a1988-
59.pdf.
12 Report No. 245, ‘Prison- Conditions, Infrastructure, and Reforms’,
Standing Committee on Home Affairs, Rajya Sabha, September 21, 32 359th Report: Functioning of Archaeological Survey of India,
2023, Standing Committee on Transport, Tourism and Culture, September
https://sansad.in/getFile/rsnew/Committee_site/Committee_File/Repo 21, 2023,
rtFile/15/188/245_2023_9_12.pdf?source=rajyasabha. https://sansad.in/getFile/rsnew/Committee_site/Committee_File/Repo
rtFile/20/193/359_2023_9_11.pdf?source=rajyasabha.
13 Recommendations on Promoting Networking and Telecom
Equipment in India, TRAI, September 22, 2023, 33 The Ancient Monuments and Archaeological Sites and Remains
https://www.trai.gov.in/sites/default/files/Recommendation_2309202 Act, 1958, August 28, 1958,
3.pdf. https://www.indiacode.nic.in/bitstream/123456789/13053/2/A1958-
24.pdf.
14 Recommendations on Improving Telecom Infrastructure in
Northeastern States of India, TRAI, September 22, 2023, 34 357th Report: Development of Niche Tourism (including Spiritual
https://www.trai.gov.in/sites/default/files/Recommendations_230920 Tourism), Theme-based Tourist Circuits and Potential Tourist Spots ,
23.pdf. Standing Committee on Transport, Tourism and Culture, September
21, 2023,
15 Recommendation on Rationalization of Entry Fee and Bank
https://sansad.in/getFile/rsnew/Committee_site/Committee_File/Repo
Guarantees, TRAI, September 19, 2023,
rtFile/20/193/357_2023_9_14.pdf?source=rajyasabha.
https://www.trai.gov.in/sites/default/files/Recommendation_1909202
3.pdf. 35 National Framework for Promoting Energy Storage Systems,
Ministry of Power, September 1, 2023,
16 Recommendations on Issues related to FM Radio Broadcasting,
https://powermin.gov.in/sites/default/files/National_Framework_for_
TRAI, September 5, 2023,
promoting_Energy_Storage_Systems_August_2023.pdf.
https://www.trai.gov.in/sites/default/files/Recommendation_0509202
3.pdf. 36 G.S.R. 649(E), Ministry of Power, September 1, 2023,
https://powermin.gov.in/sites/default/files/webform/notices/Electricit
17 Consultation Paper on Encouraging R&D in Telecom,
y_third_Amendment_Rules_alongwith_relevent_previous_amendme
Broadcasting, and IT (ICT) Sectors, TRAI, September 22, 2023,
nts.pdf.
https://www.trai.gov.in/sites/default/files/CPS_22092023.pdf.
37 G.S.R 379(E), Ministry of Power, June 8, 2005,
18 Consultation Paper on Digital Inclusion in the Era of Emerging
https://upload.indiacode.nic.in/showfile?actid=AC_CEN_19_22_000
Technologies, TRAI, September 14, 2023,
01_200336_1517807317930&type=rule&filename=20.pdf.
https://www.trai.gov.in/sites/default/files/Cons_P_14092023.pdf.
38 The Electricity Act, 2003, May 26, 2003,
19 Pre-Consultation Paper on Inputs for Formulation of “National
https://www.indiacode.nic.in/bitstream/123456789/2058/1/A2003-
Broadcasting Policy”, TRAI, September 21, 2023,
36.pdf.
https://www.trai.gov.in/sites/default/files/CP_21092023.pdf.
39 The Companies Act, 2013, August 29, 2013,
20 Consultation Paper on Digital Transformation through 5G
https://www.indiacode.nic.in/bitstream/123456789/2114/1/A2013-
Ecosystem, TRAI, September 29, 2023,
18.pdf.
https://www.trai.gov.in/sites/default/files/CP_29092023.pdf.
40 Draft Central Electricity Regulatory Commission (Terms and
21 F.No. J-24/34/2023-CPU (Reg), Ministry of Consumer Affairs,
Conditions of Tariff) Regulations, 2023, Ministry of Power,
Food and Public Distribution, September 6, 2023,
September 10, 2023, https://cercind.gov.in/2023/draft_reg/DR-
https://consumeraffairs.nic.in/sites/default/files/file-
100923.pdf.
uploads/latestnews/Draft%20Guidelines%20for%20Prevention%20a
nd%20Regulation%20of%20Dark%20Patterns%202023.pdf. 41 The Central Electricity Regulatory Commission (Terms and
Conditions of Tariff) Regulations, 2019, March 7, 2019,
22 The Consumer Protection Act, 2019, August 9, 2023,
https://cercind.gov.in/2019/regulation/Tariff%20Regulations-
https://www.indiacode.nic.in/bitstream/123456789/15256/1/a2019-
2019.pdf.
35.pdf.
42 The Electricity Act, 2003, Ministry of Power, June 2, 2003,
23 “358th Report: Development and Expansion of Existing and New
https://powermin.gov.in/sites/default/files/uploads/The%20Electricity
National Inland Waterways”, Standing Committee on Transport,
%20Act_2003.pdf.
Tourism and Culture, September 21, 2023,
https://sansad.in/getFile/rsnew/Committee_site/Committee_File/Repo 43 Explanatory Memorandum on Draft Central Electricity Regulatory
rtFile/20/193/358_2023_9_11.pdf?source=rajyasabha Commission (Terms and Conditions of Tariff) Regulations, 2023,
Ministry of Power, September 10, 2023,
24 S.O. 698(E), Ministry of Road Transport and Highway, September
https://cercind.gov.in/2023/draft_reg/EM-100923.pdf
27, 2023, https://egazette.gov.in/WriteReadData/2023/249044.pdf.
44 The Mineral (Auction) Amendment Rules, 2023, The Gazette of
25 Central Motor Vehicles Rules, 1989, Ministry of Road Transport
India, Ministry of Mines, September 1, 2023,
and Highway, https://morth.nic.in/sites/default/files/CMVR-
https://mines.gov.in/admin/storage/app/uploads/64f5ab9c5271d1693
chapter5_1.pdf.
821852.pdf.
26 Motor Vehicles Act, 1988, Ministry of Road Transport and
45 The Mineral (Auction) Rules, 2015 as amended up to November 2,
Highways, 2021, Indian Bureau of Mines,
https://www.indiacode.nic.in/bitstream/123456789/9460/1/a1988- https://ibm.gov.in/writereaddata/files/11222021124835Mineral_Auct
59.pdf. ion_Rules_2015%20updated%20upto%2002112021.pdf.
27 Central Motor Vehicles Rules, 1989, Ministry of Road Transport 46 The Mines and Minerals (Development and Regulation) Act, 1957,
and Highway, https://morth.nic.in/sites/default/files/CMVR- https://www.indiacode.nic.in/bitstream/123456789/1421/3/a1957-
chapter1_1.pdf. 67.pdf.
28 Draft AIS-197: Bharat New Car Assessment Program, Ministry of 47 The Minerals (Evidence of Mineral Contents) Rules, 2015, Indian
Road Transport and Highways, June 26, 2022, Bureau of Mines,
https://morth.nic.in/sites/default/files/ASI/Draft%20AIS%20197%20. https://ibm.gov.in/writereaddata/files/02032022105439Evidence%20
pdf. of%20Mineral%20Rule_2015.pdf.
29 G.S.R. 663(E), Ministry of Road Transport and Highway, 48 The Hazardous and Other Wastes (Management and
September, 12, Transboundary Movement) Second Amendment Rules, 2023,
https://egazette.gov.in/WriteReadData/2023/248660.pdf Ministry of Environment, Forest and Climate Change eGazette,
30 Central Motor Vehicles Rule, 1989, Ministry of Road Transport September 18, 2023,
https://egazette.gov.in/WriteReadData/2023/248814.pdf.
and Highway, https://morth.nic.in/sites/default/files/CMVR-
chapter3_1.pdf 49 The Hazardous and Other Wastes (Management and
31 Motor Vehicles Act, 1988, Ministry of Road Transport and Transboundary Movement) Rules, 2016, Ministry of Environment,
Highways,
- 17-
Monthly Policy Review – September 2023 PRS Legislative Research
53 The Employees’ State Insurance Act, 1948, April 19, 1948,
https://labour.gov.in/sites/default/files/theemployeesact1948_0.pdf.
Forest and Climate Change, Central Pollution Control Board, April 4,
2016, 54 The Draft National Strategy on Robotics, 2023, Ministry of
https://cpcb.nic.in/displaypdf.php?id=aHdtZC9IV01fUnVsZXNfMjA Electronics and Information Technology, 4th September, 2023,
xNi5wZGY=. https://www.meity.gov.in/writereaddata/files/Draft-National-
Strategy-Robotics.pdf.
50 The Environment (Protection) Act, 1986, Central Pollution Control
Board, May 23, 1986, DISCLAIMER: This document is being furnished to you for your
https://cpcb.nic.in/displaypdf.php?id=aG9tZS9lcGEvZXByb3RlY3R information. You may choose to reproduce or redistribute this
fYWN0XzE5ODYucGRm. report for non-commercial purposes in part or in full to any other
person with due acknowledgement of PRS Legislative Research
51 Implementation of the National Education Policy, 2020 in Higher
(“PRS”). The opinions expressed herein are entirely those of the
Education, September 21, 2023, Standing Committee on Education,
author(s). PRS makes every effort to use reliable and
Women, Youth Affairs and Sports,
comprehensive information, but PRS does not represent that the
https://sansad.in/getFile/rsnew/Committee_site/Committee_File/Repo
contents of the report are accurate or complete. PRS is an
rtFile/16/189/356_2023_9_15.pdf?source=rajyasabha.
independent, not-for-profit group. This document has been
52 “51st Report: The Employees State Insurance Corporation-
prepared without regard to the objectives or opinions of those
Applicability and Benefits under ESI Scheme, Functioning of ESI who may receive it
Hospitals and Management of Corpus Fund”, Standing Committee on
Labour, Textiles and Skill Development, September 20, 2023,
https://sansad.in/getFile/lsscommittee/Labour,%20Textiles%20and%
20Skill%20Development/17_Labour_Textiles_and_Skill_Developme
nt_51.pdf?source=loksabhadocs.
- 18-
