Monthly Policy Review
July 2025
Highlights of this Issue
Monsoon session 2025 commences (p. 2)
The monsoon session of Parliament started from July 21, 2025. The session will have 21 sittings and continue
till August 21, 2025.
Consumer Price Index inflation was 2.7% in the first quarter of 2025-26 (p. 2)
CPI inflation was 3.7% in the fourth quarter of 2024-25, while it was 4.9% in the first quarter of 2024-25. Food
inflation in the first quarter of 2025-26 was 0.57%.
India and UK sign the Comprehensive Economic and Trade Agreement (p. 4)
The agreement will provide duty-free access to 99% of India’s exports to UK. It will also provide for simplified
visa procedures and liberalised entry categories to enhance the market access in the services sector.
Select Committee submits report on Income-Tax Bill, 2025 (p. 2)
The Income-Tax Bill, 2025 seeks to replace the Income-Tax Act, 1961. The Committee has recommended
amendments to fix drafting issues and align the Bill with the Act.
The National Sports Governance Bill, 2025 introduced in Lok Sabha (p. 7)
The Bill sets up the National Sports Board which will recognise national sports governing bodies. It also sets up
the National Sports Tribunal to adjudicate sports-related disputes.
The National Anti-Doping (Amendment) Bill, 2025 introduced in Lok Sabha (p. 7)
The Bill transfers the power of constituting the Appeal Panel from the National Board for Anti-Doping in Sports
to the central government. It provides for operational independence of office bearers of NADA.
Cabinet approves the National Sports Policy (p. 7)
The Policy aims to improve sporting culture at various levels, including schools, colleges, and universities. It
aims to encourage sports-related industries such as manufacturing and tourism, and make sports more inclusive.
Comments invited on the National Telecom Policy, 2025 (p. 5)
The Policy aims to improve telecom connectivity, incentivise domestic telecom equipment production and
exports, and improve telecom cyber security.
The National Cooperative Policy, 2025 released (p. 6)
Key features include encouraging states to developing model cooperative villages, upskilling cooperative
members and aligning cooperatives with export hubs.
Cabinet approves the Employment Linked Incentive Scheme (p. 4)
The scheme aims to generate employment for approximately 4.1 crore youth by offering incentives to first-time
employees and support to employers for additional employment generation.
Cabinet approves scheme to promote private sector investment in R&D (p. 8)
The scheme will fund private R&D through low or zero interest loans in key technology sectors. Funds may
also be given as equity investment in the case of startups.
Cabinet approves the Prime Minister Dhan Dhaanya Krishi Yojana (p. 6)
The scheme aims to develop agriculture and allied sectors in 100 districts with low productivity, low cropping
intensity, and low credit disbursement.
August 1, 2025
PRS Legislative Research ■ Institute for Policy Research Studies
3rd Floor, Gandharva Mahavidyalaya ■ 212, Deen Dayal Upadhyaya Marg ■ New Delhi – 110002
Tel: (011) 23234801, 43434035 ■ www.prsindia.org
Monthly Policy Review – July 2025 PRS Legislative Research
Parliament Figure 1: Monthly inflation in Q1 of 2025-26 (%
change, year-on-year)
Atri Prasad Rout (atri@prsindia.org)
4%
Monsoon Session 2025 begins 3.2%
3% 2.8%
The Monsoon Session of Parliament commenced on
2.1%
July 21, 2025. The session is scheduled to be held till 1.8%
2%
August 21, 2025, with a total of 21 sittings.
0.9% 1.0%
1%
Eight Bills are listed for introduction in this session. 0.4%
Two of these Bills were introduced in Lok Sabha.
0%
These are the National Sports Governance Bill, 2025,
-0.1%
and the National Anti-Doping (Amendment) Bill, 2025.
-1%
Other Bills listed for introduction include: (i) the Jan
-1.1%
Vishwas (Amendment of Provisions) Bill, 2025, (ii) the
-2%
Taxation Laws (Amendment) Bill, 2025, (iii) the Geo-
CPI WPI Food Inflation
heritage Sites and Geo-relics (Preservation and
Maintenance) Bill, 2025, and (iv) the Mines and Apr-25 May-25 Jun-25
Minerals (Development and Regulation) Amendment
Bill, 2025. Sources: Ministry of Statistics and Programme Implementation;
Ministry of Commerce and Industry; PRS.
Seven pending Bills are listed for consideration and
passing. Of these, the Bills of Lading Bill, 2024, was
passed by Parliament. The six other Bills are: (i) the
Income-Tax Bill, 2025, (ii) the Indian Ports Bill, 2025, Finance
(iii) the Merchant Shipping Bill, 2024, (iv) the Coastal
Shrusti Singh (shrusti@prsindia.org)
Shipping Bill, 2024, (v) the Carriage of Goods by Sea
Bill, 2024, and (vi) a Bill to reserve seats in the Goa
Select Committee submits report on the
Legislative Assembly for Scheduled Tribes. The Select
Committee on the Income-Tax Bill, 2025, presented its Income-Tax Bill, 2025
report in Lok Sabha on July 21, 2025.
The Income-Tax Bill, 2025 was introduced in Lok
For more details on the legislative agenda for the Sabha on February 13, 2025. The Bill seeks to replace
Monsoon Session, please see here. the Income-Tax Act, 1961. It was referred to a Select
Committee of Lok Sabha (Chair: Mr Baijayant Panda).
The Report of the Committee was tabled in Lok Sabha
on July 21, 2025.3 The Committee observed that the
Macroeconomic Development Bill primarily seeks to simplify the language, and does
not bring any substantive changes.
Shrusti Singh (shrusti@prsindia.org)
The Committee noted several drafting issues and
recommended addressing them. It noted that the
CPI inflation averaged 2.7% in the first
implications of some provisions will change as
quarter of 2025-26
compared to the 1961 Act. This is owing to inadvertent
Consumer Price Index (CPI) inflation was 2.7% in the omissions or changes in the language of the provisions.
first quarter (April-June) of 2025-26, lower than 4.9% It recommended amendments to address such issues.
in the first quarter of 2024-25.1 In the fourth quarter
It has also recommended clarifying some provisions,
(January-March) of 2024-25, it was 3.7%.
including unincorporated provisions of the Finance
Food inflation averaged 0.57% in the first quarter of Acts of 2024 and 2025, and addressing reference and
2025-26, significantly lower than 8.9% in the typographical errors.
corresponding quarter of 2024-25. In the fourth quarter
For a PRS Summary of the report, see here.
of 2024-25, food inflation was 4.1%.
Wholesale Price Index (WPI) inflation averaged 0.37% RBI releases directions for waiver of
in the first quarter of 2025-26, lower than 2.45% in the foreclosure charges on loans
corresponding quarter of 2024-25.2 In the fourth
The Reserve Bank of India (RBI) released directions
quarter of 2024-25, WPI inflation was 2.4%.
for the levy of foreclosure/pre-payment charges on
loans.4 According to the directions, regulated entities
(such as commercial banks, cooperative banks, and
NBFCs) must not levy any pre-payment charges on
non-business and business loans to individuals and
- 2 -
Monthly Policy Review – July 2025 PRS Legislative Research
Medium and Small Enterprises. These directions will classified in the following categories: (i) equity
apply to all floating rate loans and advances. schemes, (ii) debt schemes, (iii) hybrid schemes, (iv)
solution-oriented schemes, and (v) other schemes. Key
The directions allow exemptions for certain regulated
changes proposed include:
entities (REs) such as Small Finance Bank, Regional
Rural Bank, and State Cooperative Bank. These REs ▪ Equity Schemes: According to the current
will not levy pre-payment charges on loans with guidelines, Asset Management Companies (AMC)
sanctioned amount up to Rs 50 lakh. Pre-payment of are allowed to offer either a value fund or a contra
loans will be allowed on a partial or full repayment fund under equity schemes. The draft circular
basis without any minimum lock-in period. These proposes to change this to allow mutual funds to
directions will apply to all loans and advances offer both value and contra funds. This will be
sanctioned or renewed after January 1, 2026. conditional upon overlap of scheme portfolios. In
addition, for Sectoral/Thematic Equity Funds, their
Comments invited on draft Directions on portfolio overlap with any other equity scheme
Digital Banking Channels should not exceed 50%.
The Reserve Bank of India (RBI) invited comments on ▪ Portfolio Overlap: According to the draft
the draft directions to regulate banking and non- circular, this portfolio overlap will be monitored
banking activities by banks related to digital banking, regularly on a semi-annual basis using month-end
mobile banking, and internet banking channels.5 Key portfolios of an AMC. If the overlap exceeds the
directions for banks include: permitted limit, the AMC will be allowed an
extension of 30 business days to rebalance their
▪ Applicability: The directions will be applicable to portfolio.
all commercial and cooperative banks offering
services through digital channels. ▪ One scheme per category: Under the current
guidelines, AMCs are permitted to offer only one
▪ Eligibility for provision of banking services: scheme per category. However, the draft circular
Banks offering fund or non-fund based proposes to allow AMCs to launch an additional
transactional banking services will require prior scheme in the existing scheme category. This is
approval of RBI. For this approval, banks must subject to conditions including: (i) existing scheme
ensure a fully functioning IT infrastructure, and completing five years, (ii) existing scheme ending
have adequate financial and technical capacity. subscriptions once the additional scheme is
They must also comply with minimum regulatory launched, and (iii) the total asset under
capital ratio and meet net worth thresholds. management of the existing scheme being above
Rs 50,000 crore.
▪ Compliance requirements: The directions
provide that banks must comply with the ▪ Investment of residual funds: According to the
Information Technology Act, 2000, the Digital draft circular, AMCs will be allowed to invest the
Personal Data Protection Act, 2023, the Foreign residual portion of total assets in a diversified mix
Exchange Management Act, 1999, and other of asset classes. These would include equity, debt,
instructions issued by the RBI to conduct digital gold and silver, Real Estate Investment Trusts and
banking operations. Banks will also be required to Infrastructure Investment Trusts.
comply with the customer protection guidelines.
Comments are invited until August 8, 2025.
▪ Operational guidelines: Banks will be required
to: (i) obtain consent from customers for provision
CAG submits audit report on compliance with
of digital banking services, (ii) offer multiple
the FRBM Act, 2003
registration channels for digital banking, (iii) make
digital banking services optional and voluntary for The Comptroller and Auditor General (CAG) of India
customers, (iv) deploy risk mitigation, transaction presented a report on compliance with the Fiscal
monitoring, and surveillance systems, and (v) Responsibility and Budget Management (FRBM) Act,
refrain from displaying third-party products and 2003 in the financial year 2022-23.8 The 2003 Act
services on digital banking channels. provides a legislative framework for the reduction of
debt and deficit of the central government over the
Comments are invited until August 11, 2025.
medium term. The Act sets targets for the central
government to ensure responsible fiscal management
Comments invited on draft circular on
and long-term economic stability. Key observations
categorisation of mutual fund schemes
and recommendations of the CAG include:
The Securities and Exchange Board of India (SEBI) ▪ General Government Debt: Under the FRBM
released a draft circular on Categorisation and Amendment Act, 2018, the central government set
Rationalisation of Mutual Fund Schemes for public a target to limit general government debt to 60% of
comments.6 Mutual Fund Schemes are currently GDP by 2024-25, with limit for the central
categorised on the basis of SEBI guidelines released in government debt at 40% of GDP. General
2017.7 Under the 2017 guidelines, the schemes are government debt is the total liability of the central
- 3 -
Monthly Policy Review – July 2025 PRS Legislative Research
and state governments. In 2022-23, general PM visits Maldives for bilateral talks
government debt was 81.4% of GDP as compared
Prime Minister Mr. Narendra Modi visited Maldives
to 70.4% in 2018-19. The outstanding debt of the
for bilateral talks.10 Both countries discussed the
central government was 58% of GDP in 2022-23.
progress on implementation of the Comprehensive
However, CAG also observed that the economy
Economic and Maritime Security Partnership, and the
has grown at a faster rate than central government
proposed Free Trade Agreement and Bilateral
debt, enabling it to absorb and service the debt.
Investment Treaty. The two countries signed
▪ Rolling targets of fiscal indicators: The Act memoranda of understanding on aquaculture, digital
requires the central government to present public infrastructure, UPI, pharma, and concessional
projections for fiscal targets for two years lines of credit. India will provide a new line of credit
following the current fiscal year. This includes worth Rs 4,850 crore for infrastructural development in
projections for revenue deficit, fiscal deficit, Maldives. The two countries also reached an
primary deficit, tax revenue, and central agreement to reduce Maldives’ annual debt repayment
government debt as a percentage of GDP. The obligations by 40% under existing lines of credit.
advance targets have to be presented in the
Medium-term Fiscal Policy (MTFP) statement.
The CAG noted that the central government has
not presented rolling targets for fiscal indicators Labour and Employment
since 2021-22. Instead, the central government has
presented the reasons for deviation from the fiscal Cabinet approves the Employment Linked
targets in the MTFP statement for these years. Incentive Scheme
▪ Disinvestment proceeds: CAG noted that Shrusti Singh (shrusti@prsindia.org)
receipts from disinvestment in 2022-23 were lower
than the pre-pandemic period. The Union Cabinet approved the Employment Linked
Incentive (ELI) Scheme with an outlay of Rs 99,446
▪ Tax revenue raised but not realised: CAG
crore.11 The scheme will be implemented over a period
observed that the tax revenue raised but not
of two years and will cover jobs created between
realised increased in 2022-23 as compared to the
August 1, 2025 and July 31, 2027. It aims to
previous year. It noted that this may indicate a lost
incentivise employment generation and enhance social
opportunity to tap non-debt receipts by the
security across sectors. The scheme has the following
government. At the end of 2022-23, Rs 21.3 lakh
two components:
crore worth of tax revenue was unrealised.
▪ Support to employers: Under the scheme,
For a PRS Summary of the report, see here. employers will be provided incentives up to Rs
3,000 per month for two years for each additional
employee hired. Employers with fewer than 50
employees will be required to make two additional
External Affairs hirings while those with more than 50 employees
will have to make five additional hirings.
Jahanvi Choudhary (jahanvi@prsindia.org) Incentives will be conditional on sustained
employment for at least six months.
India and the UK sign the Comprehensive Manufacturing sector establishments will be
Economic and Trade Agreement offered incentives for two additional years under
the scheme. The scheme aims to generate
India and the UK signed the Comprehensive Economic
additional employment for up to 2.6 crore persons
and Trade Agreement (CETA).9 This agreement aims
under this component.
to double bilateral trade between the two countries by
2030. As of July 2025, bilateral trade between India ▪ Incentive to first-time employees: Under this
and the UK was about USD 56 billion. Key highlights component, first time employees registered with
of the agreement include: (i) duty-free access on 99% the Employees Provident Fund will receive an
of India’s exports to the UK, (ii) tariff reduction from incentive worth one month’s wage, subject to a
70% to 0% on marine products, textiles, and processed maximum of Rs 15,000. This will be paid in two
foods, and (iii) enhanced market access in the services instalments. The first instalment will be paid upon
sector through simplified visa procedures and completion of six months of service. The
liberalised entry categories. employees will receive the second instalment upon
completing 12 months of service and a financial
India also signed an agreement on the Double
literacy programme. First-time employees with
Contribution Convention with the UK. Under this,
salaries up to one lakh rupees per month will be
Indian professionals and their employers will be
eligible. The scheme aims to cover 1.92 crore
exempt from the social security payments in the UK for
employees under this component.
up to three years.
- 4 -
Monthly Policy Review – July 2025 PRS Legislative Research
Draft National Skill Development and Key features of the draft Policy are as follows:
Entrepreneurship Policy, 2025 released for
▪ Improving connectivity: By 2030, the draft Policy
public feedback
aims to: (i) cover 100% population with 4G and
90% population with 5G, (ii) set up one million
Jahanvi Choudhary (jahanvi@prsindia.org)
public Wi-Fi hotspots, (iii) provide internet using
The Ministry of Skill Development and satellite where needed, (iv) enable fixed broadband
Entrepreneurship has released a draft National Policy coverage to 10 crore households, and (v) improve
for Skill Development and Entrepreneurship for public fiberisation of towers from 46% to 80%.
feedback.12 The draft Policy targets the development Fiberisation refers to the connectivity of telecom
of digital and physical infrastructure for skills and towers to the main network using fibre-optic cable,
entrepreneurship. It aims at strengthening the instead of wireless links that have lower speed and
monitoring, evaluation, and learning framework to reliability. The draft Policy also aims to improve
track policy outcomes. Key focus areas under the the quality of service, and encourage low-latency
Policy include: communication for industrial applications.
▪ Strengthening Systems: The draft Policy aims at ▪ Promoting R&D and domestic production: The
improving infrastructure, enabling policy reforms, draft Policy aims to support research in areas such
and promoting collaborations among key as AI, 6G, quantum communication, and
stakeholders. Key proposed initiatives include: (i) blockchain. It aims to achieve 50% import
enhancing the Skill India Digital Hub as a user- substitution in the telecom sector by 2030. It
centric platform, (ii) shifting to a decentralised proposes measures such as: (i) easing spectrum
open network skilling platform, (iii) building a access for R&D, (ii) funding and mentorships for
centralised labour market information system, (iv) startups and MSMEs, (iii) promoting incubation
establishing a digital lifelong learning account hubs, and (iv) establishing the Telecom
consolidating all the credentials of an individual, Manufacturing Zone with integrated infrastructure
(v) creation of a unique skill profile for every for design and production of telecom equipment.
individual, and (vi) formalising nano-enterprises.
▪ Security measures: The draft Policy proposes to
▪ Improving delivery: The draft Policy emphasises improve the security in telecom. It also includes
establishing flagship Industrial Training Institutes measures such as: (i) biometric-based identification
and skilling Centres of Excellence using PPP for users, (ii) enabling standardised and security-
models. It also aims at the integration of skilling, certified hardware and software supply chains, and
education, and work experience with the National (iii) using AI for incident reporting and countering
Credit Framework. The draft Policy proposes the threats from adversarial attacks.
development of a National Employability and
▪ Simplifying compliances: The draft Policy seeks
Entrepreneurship Measure to periodically assess
to reduce compliance burden by: (i) setting up a
the quality of the workforce. In addition, a skilling
single-window portal for permissions, (ii) digitising
programme for women re-entering the workforce is
regulatory processes, and (iii) faster approvals.
also proposed.
▪ Improving sustainability: The draft Policy aims
▪ Incentives: The draft Policy proposes
to reduce the telecom sector’s carbon footprint by
introduction of skill vouchers allowing learners to
30% by 2030. It specifies focusing on e-waste
self-select skilling programs and providers. In
management and climate change resilience.
addition, it also proposes the development of a
reward and recognition mechanism for industries Comments are invited until August 14, 2025.
to engage skilling institutions and initiatives.
Industries will be rewarded and recognised based Comments invited on draft amendments to the
on their degree of engagement, commitment guidelines on television rating agencies
towards leading, and supporting skilling initiatives.
The Ministry of Information and Broadcasting has
invited comments on the draft amendments to the
Policy Guidelines for Television Rating Agencies in
India, 2014.14 The 2014 guidelines set out the terms
Communications
and conditions for the registration of television rating
Ayush Stephen Toppo (ayush@prsindia.org) agencies with the Ministry.15 The 2014 guidelines
prohibit: (i) board members of a television rating
Comments invited on the draft National agency from being in broadcasting or advertising
businesses, and (ii) a single company or promoter from
Telecom Policy, 2025
holding substantial equity across multiple rating,
The Department of Telecommunications has invited broadcasting, and advertising agencies. The draft
comments on the draft National Telecom Policy, amendments propose to remove these restrictions.
2025.13 It seeks to replace the National Digital
Comments are invited until August 1, 2025.
Communications Policy (NDCP) issued in 2018.
- 5 -
Monthly Policy Review – July 2025 PRS Legislative Research
Cooperation Cabinet approves a scheme for loans to
cooperatives through NCDC
The National Cooperative Policy released
Shrusti Singh (shrusti@prsindia.org)
Ayush Stephen Toppo (ayush@prsindia.org)
The Union Cabinet approved a scheme to extend grants
The Ministry of Cooperation released the National worth Rs 2,000 crore to the National Cooperative
Cooperative Policy, 2025.16 It replaces the National Development Corporation (NCDC).18 NCDC has been
Cooperative Policy, 2002.17 The 2025 Policy aims to established by the central government under the
create an enabling regulatory, economic, and legal National Cooperative Development Corporation Act,
ecosystem for sustainable development of cooperatives. 1962.19 The Corporation is responsible for planning
Key features of the Policy include: and promoting programmes for the whole supply chain
of agricultural produce, industrial goods, and other
▪ Support to cooperatives: The Policy outlines
commodity cooperatives. Rs 500 crore will be released
strategies to develop accessible finance, business
to NCDC annually over four years between 2025-26
research capacity, and marketing and branding
and 2028-29. On the basis of these grants, NCDC is
services for cooperatives. Key initiatives include:
expected to raise Rs 20,000 crore from open market
(i) development of at least one model cooperative
during this period. NCDC will deploy these funds for
village per district, (ii) promoting cooperative-led
granting loans to cooperatives. These loans may be
economic clusters for rural produce, (iii)
used for new projects, plant expansions, and working
encouraging cooperatives to explore GI
capital requirements. This scheme is expected to
(geographical indication) tags and trademarks to
benefit 2.9 crore members of 13,288 cooperative
secure product recognition, and (v) aligning
societies across different sectors.
cooperatives with export-oriented goods production
identified under One District One Product (ODOP)
initiative. It also aims to encourage states and
union territories to bring down cooperative taxes
Agriculture
where they are higher than corporate tax.
▪ Capacity building and innovation: The Policy Shrusti Singh (shrusti@prsindia.org)
aims to upskill cooperative members and increase
participation of women, disadvantaged sections, and Cabinet approves the Prime Minister Dhan
under-represented age groups. It also aims to Dhaanya Krishi Yojana
promote adoption of environment-friendly practices
The Union Cabinet approved the PM Dhan Dhaanya
by cooperatives. It aims to achieve this through the
Krishi Yojana with an annual outlay of Rs 24,000 crore
following initiatives: (i) develop training and skill
for six years starting from 2025-26.20,21 The scheme
development capacity through partnerships with
was announced in the Union Budget 2025-26.22 The
academic institutions for new cooperative-focused
scheme aims to develop 100 districts with low
courses, (ii) creation of a national digital
agricultural productivity, low cropping intensity, and
cooperative employment exchange to match job
less credit disbursement into Dhan-Dhaanya
seekers and employers in the cooperative sector,
Districts. A minimum of one district will be selected
(iii) promote agricultural cooperatives to adopt
from each state.
climate resilient farming methods, and (iv)
diversification into new areas such as Aushadhi The scheme will be implemented in partnership with
Kendra and fuel retail outlets, among others. the private sector, state schemes, and existing schemes
across different government departments. Under the
▪ Implementation structure: The Policy proposes
scheme, committees will be formed at the district, state,
the creation of a dedicated implementation cell
and national level to develop district plans. These
within the Ministry of Cooperation. It also
plans will have to be in alignment with national goals
proposes the formation of a National Steering
of crop diversification, soil and water conservation,
Committee on Cooperation Policy chaired by the
self-sufficiency in agriculture, and natural and organic
Union Minister of Cooperation, to oversee overall
farming. Scheme progress will be tracked on a
monitoring. Additionally, a Policy Implementation
monthly basis through monitoring of 117 key
and Monitoring Committee, chaired by the Union
performance indicators. Under the scheme, a
Cooperation Secretary, will be responsible for
comprehensive dashboard for monitoring, dedicated
addressing implementation bottlenecks.
mobile app for farmers, and a district ranking
mechanism will be developed.
Cabinet approves additional outlay for PM
Kisan Sampada Yojana
The Union Cabinet approved additional outlay worth
Rs 1,920 crore for the Pradhan Mantri Kisan Sampada
- 6 -
Monthly Policy Review – July 2025 PRS Legislative Research
Yojana (PMKSY).23 The scheme provides for creation The National Anti-Doping (Amendment) Bill,
of modern infrastructure including storage and 2025 introduced in Lok Sabha
transportation infrastructure, agro-processing clusters,
and food processing and preservation capacities.24 Rs Ayush Stephen Toppo (ayush@prsindia.org)
920 crore will be utilised for sanctioning projects under
The National Anti-Doping (Amendment) Bill, 2025
different components of PMKSY until 2025-26. Rs
was introduced in Lok Sabha.26 It seeks to amend the
1,000 crore has been approved for setting up 50 multi-
National Anti-Doping Act, 2022 which prohibits
product food irradiation units and 100 nationally
doping in sports. Doping is the consumption of certain
accredited food testing labs. Food irradiation facilities
prohibited substances by athletes to enhance
help in reducing post-harvest losses and wastage of
performance. The Act establishes: (i) the National
perishable farm produce by enhancing shelf-life.
Anti-Doping Agency (NADA) to enforce anti-doping
rules, and (ii) the National Board to oversee NADA and
advise the central government on anti-doping
Sports regulations.27 Key features of the Bill include:
▪ Central government to constitute the Appeal
The National Sports Governance Bill, 2025
Panel: The Act requires the National Board to
introduced in Lok Sabha
constitute: (i) a Disciplinary Panel to determine
consequences of anti-doping violations, and (ii) an
Jahanvi Choudhary (jahanvi@prsindia.org)
Appeal Panel to hear appeals against its decisions.
The Bill transfers the power to constitute the
The National Sports Governance Bill, 2025 was
introduced in Lok Sabha.25 The Bill seeks to provide Appeal Panel from the Board to the central
government, and empowers it to specify the manner
for recognition of national sports bodies and regulate
of filing and hearing of appeals.
their functioning. Key features of the Bill include:
▪ Autonomy of Anti-Doping Bodies: The Act
▪ Governing Bodies for Sports: The Bill provides
empowers the Board to obtain information or issue
for establishing: (i) National Olympic Committee,
directions to the Disciplinary Panel and Appeal
(ii) National Paralympic Committee, and (iii)
Panel. The Bill removes these powers. It adds that
National and Regional Sports Federations for each
the Director General and other members of NADA
sport. The Bill requires these bodies to establish:
will have operational independence from: (i) any
(i) certain committees for their functioning, (ii) a
national or international sports federation, (ii)
code of ethics to govern conduct of persons such as
Olympic or Paralympic Committee, (iii) any
members, affiliates, athletes, coaches, and
government department, and (iv) any sports or anti-
sponsors, and (iii) a grievance redressal
doping agency.
mechanism for complaints from such persons. The
Bill specifies certain conditions such as age limit ▪ Only specified bodies to file appeal to CAS: The
for members of executive committee of these Act allows any person to file an appeal to the Court
bodies, and term limit for office bearers such as the of Arbitration for Sport (CAS) in Switzerland,
President, the Secretary General, and the against a decision of the Appeal Panel. The Bill
Treasurer. The Bill states that the international specifies the entities that may file an appeal to CAS.
charters and statutes will primarily govern these These include bodies such as the World Anti-
bodies. In the event of a conflict with the Bill, the Doping Agency, the International Olympic
central government may issue clarifications. Committee, the International Paralympic
Committee, and international sports federations.
▪ National Sports Board: The Bill empowers the
central government to establish a National Sports For a PRS summary of the Bill, see here.
Board. This Board will grant recognition to
national sports bodies, inquire into the welfare of
Cabinet approves the National Sports Policy
sportspersons, and issue guidelines on ethics and
compliance with international rules. Jahanvi Choudhary (jahanvi@prsindia.org)
▪ National Sports Tribunal: The Bill provides for
The Union Cabinet approved the National Sports
a National Sports Tribunal to address disputes
Policy, 2025.28 It replaces the National Sports Policy
related to sports. Appeals against its decisions will
(NSP), 2001.29 Key features of the Policy include:
lie before the Supreme Court, except where
international charters or bye-laws require appeal to ▪ Promotion of sports: The Policy aims at
the Court of Arbitration for Sport in Switzerland. improving sporting culture at various levels,
including schools, colleges, and universities. Key
▪ Elections to Sports Bodies: The central
proposed interventions include: (i) developing
government will establish a national panel of
structured sports programs across age groups, (ii)
electoral officers to oversee elections of national
sports related literacy from early childhood, (iii)
sports bodies.
expanding talent search, (iv) strengthening sports
For a PRS summary of the Bill, see here. safety, ethics, gender parity, and grievance
- 7 -
Monthly Policy Review – July 2025 PRS Legislative Research
redressal, and (v) strengthening the para-sports and promotes scientific research in the country.
ecosystem. It aims to provide for development of Long-term concessional loans will be provided
sports infrastructure with a special focus on rural from SPF to a variety of second-level fund
and remote areas. It seeks to encourage innovative managers. These managers will then provide long-
financing mechanisms and engage private sector term loans to private companies at zero or low-
for sports. It also provides for a national interest rates. In case of startups, fund managers
monitoring framework with benchmarks, key may also finance in the form of equity investments.
performance indicators, and time-bound targets.
▪ Implementing agencies: The Department of
▪ Sports for economic development: The Policy Science and Technology will implement the
aims to promote economic development through scheme. The Executive Council of the ANRF will
sports. Key proposed initiatives include: (i) frame guidelines, and recommend second-level
promoting sports tourism through local and fund managers. This council is chaired by the
international events, (ii) boosting domestic sports Principal Scientific Advisor to the central
equipment manufacturing, (iii) encouraging government. An Empowered Group of Secretaries,
entrepreneurship in sports, and (iv) exploring chaired by the Cabinet Secretary will approve
public-private partnership models for monetisation scheme changes, sectors, types of projects to be
of sports stadiums and online platforms. supported, and second-level fund managers.
▪ Making sports more inclusive: The Policy aims
Guidelines for cybersecurity audits released
at promoting inclusivity in sports education and
careers. It aims to reduce barriers to participation The Indian Computer Emergency Response Team
for under-represented groups such as women, (CERT-In) released the Comprehensive Cyber Security
economically weaker sections, tribal communities, Audit Policy Guidelines, 2025.31 CERT-In has been
and physically and psychologically challenged appointed by the central government under the
individuals. A specific talent development Information Technology Act, 2000. Under the Act,
mechanism will be developed for under- CERT-In has been granted the authority to collect
represented groups. In addition, the Policy will information, take emergency measures, and issue
also aim to promote indigenous sports and games guidelines and advisories related to cyber security and
from states. cyber security incidents. The Cyber Security Audit
Guidelines aim to standardise cybersecurity audit
The Policy will aim to promote community health
processes and specify responsibilities of organisations
and well-being through targeted interventions in
involved in audits. Key features include:
sports. This will include engagement with
educational institutions and workplaces targeting ▪ Audit scope: Auditee organisations are expected
physical and mental well-being. to ensure a cyber security audit covering their
information and communication technology
systems at least once a year. The audit will include
compliance audits, risk assessments, vulnerability
Science and Technology
assessments, assessment of cloud security and AI
systems, and digital forensic readiness assessment.
Ayush Stephen Toppo (ayush@prsindia.org)
The guidelines discourage employing only tool-
based audits. It specifies that audits must go
Cabinet approves scheme to promote private
beyond checking for a predefined list of risks, and
sector investment in R&D
instead identify all known vulnerabilities. These
audits must be carried out by an auditing
The Union Cabinet has approved the Research,
organisation empanelled with CERT-IN. The
Development, and Innovation (RDI) Scheme to
frequency and scope of all audits must be disclosed
promote private sector investment in R&D in sunrise
and strategic sectors.30 The scheme will extend in the organisation’s annual report.
long-term loans at low or zero interest for such ▪ Internal checks for auditors: The auditing
investments. Key features of the scheme include: organisations must implement internal checks,
including: (i) a separate verification team reviewing
▪ Applicability: The scheme will support high-
the audit team’s work, (ii) restrictions on deploying
technology projects at advanced stages of
freelancers, interns, freshers, moonlighters, third
development, and acquisition of critical and
party consultants or employees serving notice
strategic technologies. It will also facilitate setting
periods for conducting cybersecurity audits, and
up a Deep-Tech Fund of Funds.
(iii) the use of tested and approved auditing tools.
▪ Fund disbursement: The scheme will have a
corpus of one lakh crore rupees. This fund will be
disbursed through a two-tier funding structure. A
Special Purpose Fund (SPF) will be created under
the Anusandhan National Research Foundation
(ANRF). ANRF is the apex body that supports
- 8 -
Monthly Policy Review – July 2025 PRS Legislative Research
Transport 1.5 times the base fare. The revised guidelines
increase this cap to twice the base fare.
Parliament passed a Bill to replace Bills of
▪ Fleet management: Under the new guidelines,
Lading Act, 1856
aggregators cannot on-board vehicles older than
Atri Prasad Rout (atri@prsindia.org) eight years. The state government may also direct
aggregators to: (i) increase the share of electric,
The Bills of Lading Bill, 2024 was passed by alternate fuel, or zero emission vehicles in their
Parliament. The Bill was introduced in August 2024. fleet on an annual basis, and (ii) include certain
It replaces the Indian Bills of Lading Act, 1856. The proportion of disabled-friendly vehicles.
Act provides a legal framework for issuance of bills of
lading. A bill of lading refers to a document issued by Guidelines on trucks under the PM E-DRIVE
a freight carrier to a shipper containing details such as scheme notified
the type, quantity, condition, and destination of goods
Jahanvi Choudhary (jahanvi@prsindia.org)
being carried. The Bill retains all provisions of the Act.
The Bill adds that the central government may issue
The Ministry of Heavy Industries notified details on
directions for carrying out provisions of the Bill.
demand incentives for the e-trucks segment of the PM
For a PRS summary of the Bill, see here. E-drive scheme.34 Under the scheme, original
equipment manufacturers (OEMs) and customers will
Revised guidelines for motor vehicle receive incentives on the sale and purchase of e-trucks.
aggregators released
The demand incentive will be made available to buyers
Atri Prasad Rout (atri@prsindia.org) in the form of an upfront reduction in purchase price.
This gap in the sale price will be reimbursed to the
The Ministry of Road Transport and Highways released OEMs by the Ministry after the sale. The maximum
the Motor Vehicle Aggregator Guidelines, 2025 to incentive is set at Rs 9.6 lakh per vehicle, which will
replace similar guidelines from 2020.32,33 These vary depending on the truck category. Incentives will
guidelines provide for a licencing system for motor be extended to the following categories of e-trucks: (i)
vehicle aggregators and specify their responsibilities. trucks with gross vehicle weight between 3.5 and 12
Key features include: tonnes and (ii) trucks with gross vehicle weight
between 12 and 55 tonnes.
▪ Licencing of aggregators: The revised guidelines
reduce the maximum period of suspension for an The scheme aims to support the deployment of around
aggregator’s licence from six months to three 5,600 e-trucks. Out of these, incentives for around
months. They also provide for cancellation of 1,100 e-trucks will be reserved for Delhi to target air
licence if the aggregator has faced a licence pollution in the city. To avail benefits under the
suspension and has committed another infraction scheme, the buyer must produce proof of the scrapping
within three financial years. Earlier, a licence of an IC engine truck. If the buyer does not own an old
could be cancelled in case of more than three IC engine truck, they may purchase a certificate of
suspensions within one financial year. The state scrappage through market mechanisms for this purpose.
government may allow aggregation of non-
transport motorcycles for journey by passengers. Standing Committee on Urban Affairs submits
report on RRTS
▪ Obligations of aggregators: Aggregators must
ensure that drivers go through psychological Shrusti Singh (shrusti@prsindia.org)
analysis, along with a medical examination before
on-boarding. They are required to provide drivers The Standing Committee on Housing and Urban
induction training of at least 40 hours, along with Affairs (Chair: Mr Magunta Sreenivasulu Reddy)
special training in sensitivity regarding gender and presented its report on ‘Regional Rapid Transit System
disabled persons. The health and term insurance and Role of NCRTC’. The Regional Rapid Transit
for drivers will be increased every year by a System (RRTS) is a high-speed rail-based commuter
percentage notified by the central government. network operating in urban and peri-urban areas. As of
Previously, this was fixed at 5%. Aggregators will April 2025, out of eight proposed RRTS, one has been
also ensure a minimum insurance cover of five sanctioned by the central government. The National
lakh rupees for passengers. Capital Region Transport Corporation (NCRTC) was
established as a joint venture between the central and
▪ Fare regulation: Rates notified by the state
four state governments for implementation of the
government for different classes of vehicles will
RRTS network. Key observations and
serve as base fare for aggregators. Aggregators
recommendations of the Committee include:
may charge a minimum of 50% of base fare. In
times of peak demand, the rules allow for dynamic ▪ Need for regional planning in metro cities: The
pricing. Earlier, dynamic pricing was capped at Committee observed that rapid urbanisation and
population growth in urban areas has led to issues
- 9 -
Monthly Policy Review – July 2025 PRS Legislative Research
related to land, housing, transportation, and implementation monitoring and verification of the
pollution. Peripheral areas around main cities are new technology.
also growing rapidly. The Committee
▪ Phased implementation: The scheme will follow
recommended that state governments prepare
a phased roll-out. In the first phase, the scheme will
detailed plans for development of big metro cities
be rolled out in 60 identified industrial clusters.
including a transport plan.
The second phase will cover 100 clusters.
▪ Expanding the mandate of NCRTC: Currently,
NCRTC undertakes overall transport development
in the National Capital region including
development of commuter rail, roads, and bus Environment
services. The Committee recommended expanding
the mandate of NCRTC to other regions. Vaishali Dhariwal (vaishali@prsindia.org)
▪ PPP model for RRTS projects: The Committee Environment Ministry amends Sulphur
recommended that NCRTC explore possible
Dioxide standards for thermal power plants
opportunities for private sector participation and
funding in RRTS projects. It noted that private The Ministry of Environment notified the Environment
players are currently mostly involved in operation (Protection) Fourth Amendment Rules, 2025.36,37,38
and maintenance of RRTS sub-systems. These Rules specify the deadlines and requirements for
complying with the Sulphur Dioxide (SO ) emission
▪ Last mile and multi-modal connectivity: The 2
standards for coal and lignite based thermal power
Committee also recommended integrating RRTS
plants. Key features include:
with other modes of transport. The Committee
recommended that NCRTC provide shuttle buses ▪ Compliance for different power plants: Earlier,
to develop last-mile connectivity. existing, and proposed power plants located within
10 km radius of Critically Polluted Areas or non-
For a PRS summary of the report, see here.
attainment cities under air quality standards were
required to comply with SO
2
emission standards by
December 31, 2028.39 Under 2025 Rules, this will
be decided on a case-to-case basis.
Power
▪ Earlier, power plants that are located outside 10
Ayush Stephen Toppo (ayush@prsindia.org) km radius of Critically Polluted Areas, National
Capital Region, non-attainment cities or cities
Scheme launched to support MSMEs in having million plus population had to comply with
adopting energy-efficient technologies emission standards by December 31, 2029. Under
the 2025 Rules, they will no longer be required to
The Ministry of Power launched the Assistance in
comply with these standards. They will be
Deploying Energy Efficient Technologies in Industries
required to ensure the minimum chimney height
& Establishments (ADEETIE) scheme.35 The scheme
requirement for dispersing SO emissions by
seeks to support Micro, Small and Medium Enterprises 2
December 31, 2029.
(MSMEs) in adopting energy-efficient and cleaner
technologies by offering them financial and technical
Rules notified for recycling of non-ferrous
support. The scheme will be implemented by the
metal scraps
Bureau of Energy Efficiency (BEE) over three years
until 2027-28. The total expected outlay under the The Ministry of Environment notified Hazardous and
scheme is Rs 1,000 crore. The scheme targets 14 Other Wastes (Management and Transboundary
energy-intensive sectors, including textiles, brick Movement) Amendment Rules, 2025.40 These were
manufacturing, chemicals, glass, pharmaceuticals, and issued under the Environment (Protection) Act, 1986.41
food processing. Key features include: The Rules regulate the recycling of non-ferrous metal
scraps. Non-ferrous metals include aluminium, copper,
▪ Interest subsidy: The scheme will offer loans at a
zinc, and their alloys. Key features include:
subsidised rate to MSMEs for adopting energy-
efficient technologies, with the government ▪ Extended producer responsibility: Producers of
covering part of the interest. The interest subsidy is non-ferrous metal products will be liable for
set at 5% for micro and small enterprises, and 3% recycling non-ferrous metal scrap. They must
for medium enterprises. meet recycling targets set by weight. The target
will take into account the quantity of non-ferrous
▪ Project planning support: The scheme will
metal produced and the average life of products as
provide technical support to MSMEs to prepare
specified by the Central Pollution Control Board
detailed project reports, and conduct investment-
(CPCB). The producer will purchase an extended
grade energy audits. These help assess their energy
producer responsibility (EPR) certificate from
needs, identify suitable technology, and estimate
registered recyclers. The CPCB will generate the
costs. The scheme also includes support for post-
- 10 -
Monthly Policy Review – July 2025 PRS Legislative Research
certificate in favour of the recycler considering the Mining
quantity of metal recycled. Central government
may establish platforms for the exchange or Vaishali Dhariwal (vaishali@prsindia.org)
transfer of these certificates as per guidelines
specified by CPCB. Producers may also refurbish Rules notified for operating rights over atomic
products made using non-ferrous metal. minerals in offshore areas
Refurbishing may defer 75% of EPR on recycling.
The Ministry of Mines notified the Offshore Areas
▪ Obligations of stakeholders: Bulk consumers of Atomic Minerals Operating Rights Rules, 2025 under
non-ferrous metal products will set up collection the Offshore Areas Mineral (Development and
points for agents to collect scrap. The collection Regulation) Act, 2002.43,44 They will apply to atomic
agents will collect scrap from manufacturers, minerals in offshore areas (either standalone or
producers, and bulk consumers, and supply to associated with other minerals) present in grades equal
registered recyclers. All these stakeholders must to or above a threshold value specified under the
file quarterly and annual reports. Apart from Atomic Minerals Concession Rules, 2016.45 Key
recycling, manufacturers must use a minimum features include:
percentage of domestically recycled material in
new products. ▪ Rights for exploration and production: Notified
government agencies will be allowed to carry out
Rules notified for the management of preliminary exploration of atomic minerals without
a licence. If a geological report confirms presence
contaminated sites
of mineral grades above the specified threshold,
The Ministry of Environment, Forest and Climate the Ministry may direct a specified authority to
Change notified the Remediation of Contaminated Sites initiate the process for granting production or
Rules, 2025 under the Environment (Protection) Act, composite licence (which permits both advanced
1986.42,41 These Rules relate to the remediation of exploration and production).
areas contaminated by toxic and hazardous substances.
▪ Issuance of composite licence and production
Key features of the Rules include:
lease: The central government will, in
▪ Central Remediation Committee: The Central consultation with specified ministries, notify
government will constitute the Central offshore areas for auction of composite and
Remediation Committee. The Chairman of the production licence. A production lease will be
Central Pollution Control Board (CPCB) will chair granted if general exploration has been completed
this Committee. This Committee will be and if quantity and grade of mineral deposit can be
responsible for (i) reviewing and monitoring the estimated with confidence. If atomic minerals of a
implementation of the Rules, and (ii) reviewing the grade equal to or above the threshold value exist
list of contaminated sites. States and Union along with other minerals, composite licence and
Territories will constitute Committees under the production lease will be granted for all minerals.
chairmanship of their respective additional chief A production lease will lapse if production does
secretaries or principal secretaries of the not begin within two years of grant.
environment departments.
▪ Discovery of atomic minerals during
▪ Responsibilities of local bodies: Urban local operations: If holder of an operating right
bodies or district-level Panchayati Raj institutions discovers atomic minerals, they must report it to
will prepare an inventory of suspected relevant authorities. If grades are below a
contaminated sites within their territories. They specified threshold, operations may continue under
will submit the inventory to State Pollution existing rights. If grades are above the threshold,
Control Boards. The local bodies will undertake a only a government entity will be eligible for grant
preliminary assessment of suspected sites. If the of a composite licence. In the case of production
level of contamination is found to be above the leases, operations may continue only for the
screening level, the site will be categorised as a originally approved mineral.
probable contamination site. A detailed
investigation will be conducted at such sites.
▪ Role of Pollution Control Boards: The State
Pollution Control Board will be responsible for: (i) Minority Affairs
prioritising contaminated sites in the state for
remediation, (ii) ordering the persons responsible Jahanvi Choudhary (jahanvi@prsindia.org)
for contamination to prepare remediation design,
and (iii) developing the post-remediation Rules under the Waqf (Amendment) Act, 2025
monitoring plan. CPCB will be responsible for notified
verifying completion of remediation. The
The Ministry of Minority Affairs notified the Unified
responsible individual or company will pay the
Waqf Management, Empowerment, Efficiency, and
complete cost of the remediation process.
- 11 -
Monthly Policy Review – July 2025 PRS Legislative Research
Development (UMEED) Rules, 2025.46 The Rules released to such RLBs. This is because tied grants
specify details on establishing and maintaining a portal cannot be re-allocated. It recommended
and database. The portal and database will administer establishing a mechanism to allow the re-allocation
the registration of waqf properties, maintenance of of tied grants as untied grants for optimal fund
accounts, publication of audit reports, and publication utilisation.
of Board proceedings.
▪ Devolution of powers: The Committee observed
Details of existing waqf properties must be filed on the that despite the constitutional mandate, devolution
system within six months of the commencement of the of functions, funds, and functionaries to RLBs
Act. Waqf properties created after the commencement remains incomplete. The Committee
of the Act must register with the Waqf Board within recommended that states prepare a time-bound
three months of their creation through this portal. roadmap for devolution of powers. It
recommended the Panchayati Raj Ministry to
The Central Waqf Council will have access to
publish an annual report on the state of devolution.
information uploaded on the portal. The Waqf Board,
It suggested the central government to link
Collectors, and other officers of the central and state
financial incentives under grants and schemes to
governments will also have access to this system.
progress on this front.
▪ Holding regular Panchayat elections: The
Committee observed that delays or disruptions in
Rural Development Panchayat elections is a key barrier to effective
fund utilisation and continuity of development
Vaishali Dhariwal (vaishali@prsindia.org) work. The Committee recommended holding
timely and regular elections. It suggested that, in
Standing Committee submits report on
the interim, states may consider appointing
devolution of funds to rural local bodies nominated representatives or administrators with
limited tenures and responsibilities.
The Standing Committee on Rural Development and
Panchayati Raj (Chair: Mr. Saptagiri Sankar Ulaka) ▪ Autonomy in expenditure: The Committee
presented its report on ‘Devolution of funds under recommended that states ensure the regular,
Panchayati Raj System’.47 Key observations and adequate, and transparent transfer of untied funds
recommendations of the Committee include: to Panchayats. It recommended that Panchayats be
given autonomy for utilisation of these funds as
▪ Restructuring Finance Commission grants:
per local needs, free from interference of higher
During the award period of the 15th Finance
administration.
Commission, grants from the central government
to rural local bodies (RLBs) are in the form of tied For a PRS summary of the report, see here.
(60%) and untied (40%) grants. Tied grants may
only be used for sanitation and the supply of
drinking water. The Committee noted that if
saturation has already been achieved in these
categories through other schemes, funds are not
1 Consumer Price Index Numbers on Base 2012=100 for Rural, 7 Categorisation and Rationalisation of Mutual Fund Schemes,
Urban and Combined for the Month of June, 2025, Ministry of Securities and Exchange Board of India, October 6, 2017,
Statistics and Programme Implementation, July 14, 2025, https://www.sebi.gov.in/legal/circulars/oct-2017/categorization-and-
https://mospi.gov.in/sites/default/files/press_release/CPI_PR_14Jun2 rationalization-of-mutual-fund-schemes_36199.html.
5.pdf. 8 Report No. 3 of 2025, Compliance of the Fiscal Responsibility and
2 Index Numbers of Wholesale Price in India for the Month of June, Budget Management Act, 2003 for the year 2022-23, Comptroller
2025 (Base Year: 2011-12), Ministry of Commerce and Industry, and Auditor General of India,
July 14, 2025, https://eaindustry.nic.in/pdf_files/cmonthly.pdf. https://cag.gov.in/uploads/download_audit_report/2025/Report-No.-
3 The Report of the Select Committee of Lok Sabha on the Income- 3-of-2025_FRBM-2022-23_English---Signed-
Tax Bill, 2025, July 2025, 0688091d19cf3d2.55109250.pdf.
https://prsindia.org/files/bills_acts/bills_parliament/2025/Select_Com 9 “India and UK sign Comprehensive Economic and Trade
mittee_Report_the_Income-Tax_Bill,2025.pdf. Agreement”, Press Information Bureau, Ministry of Commerce and
4 Reserve Bank of Indian (Pre-payment charges on loans) Directions, Industry, July 24, 2025,
2025, Reserve Bank of India, July 2, 2025, https://www.pib.gov.in/PressReleasePage.aspx?PRID=2147805.
https://rbidocs.rbi.org.in/rdocs/notification/PDFs/NT642A32A71F06 10 “Prime Minister meets the President of Maldives” Press Release,
D649B78A9622FB82B8C438.PDF. Ministry of External Affairs, July 25, 2025,
5 Draft Digital Banking Channels Authorisation Directions, 2025, https://www.mea.gov.in/press-
Reserve Bank of India, July 21, 2025, releases.htm?dtl/39874/Prime_Minister_meets_the_President_of_Ma
https://rbidocs.rbi.org.in/rdocs/Content/PDFs/DIGITAL21072025BE ldives_July_25_2025.
460CBE0DDE40EFAE60 C2D9CF666915.PDF. 11 “Cabinet approves Employment Linked Incentive (ELI) Scheme”,
6 Draft Circular for Public Comments, Categorisation and Press Information Bureau, Ministry of Labour and Employment, July
Rationalisation of Mutual Fund Schemes, Securities and Exchange 1, 2025,
Board of India, July 18, 2025, https://www.sebi.gov.in/reports-and- https://www.pib.gov.in/PressReleasePage.aspx?PRID=2141129.
statistics/reports/jul-2025/consultation-paper-on-categorization-and- 12 Draft of National Policy for Skill Development and
rationalization-of-mutual-fund-schemes_95419.html. Entrepreneurship, Ministry of Skill Development and
- 12 -
Monthly Policy Review – July 2025 PRS Legislative Research
https://www.cert-
in.org.in/PDF/Comprehensive_Cyber_Security_Audit_Policy_Guidel
Entrepreneurship, 2025, https://static.mygov.in/static/s3fs-
ines.pdf.
public/mygov_1750163047154086855.pdf.
32 Motor Vehicle Aggregators Guidelines 2020, Ministry of Road
13 Draft Telecom Policy 2025, Ministry of Communications, July 24,
Transport and Highways, November 27, 2020,
2025, https://dot.gov.in/sites/default/files/NTP_2025.pdf.
https://morth.nic.in/sites/default/files/notifications_document/Motor
14 “Entry barriers removed to allow multiple agencies in television
%20Vehicle%20Aggregators27112020150046.pdf.
ratings measurement, to foster healthy competition, bring in new
33 Motor Vehicles Aggregators Guidelines 2025, Ministry of Road
technologies and align with modern TV viewing habits”, Press
Transport and Highways, July 1, 2025,
Information Bureau, Ministry of Information and Broadcasting,
https://morth.nic.in/sites/default/files/circulars_document/MV-
July 3, 2025,
Aggregators-Guidelines-2025%20-
https://www.pib.gov.in/PressReleasePage.aspx?PRID=2141914.
%20English%20and%20Hindi.pdf.
15 Policy guidelines for television rating agencies in India, Ministry of
34 PM E-DRIVE Operational Guidelines (e-Truck), Ministry of
Information and Broadcasting, January 16, 2014,
Heavy Industries, July 10, 2025,
https://mib.gov.in/sites/default/files/2025-07/policy-guidelines-for-
https://pmedrive.heavyindustries.gov.in/docs/policy_document/Opera
television-rating-agencies-in-india-dt-16.01.2014-1.pdf.
tional%20guidelines_E-trucks.pdf.
16 National Cooperative Policy, 2025, Ministry of Cooperation,
35 “Union Minister for Power and Housing & Urban Affairs, Shri
https://www.cooperation.gov.in/sites/default/files/2025-
Manohar Lal launches ADEETIE Scheme to Accelerate Industrial
07/NCP%28Eng%29_24Jul2025_Final.pdf.
Energy Efficiency in India”, Press Information Bureau, Ministry of
17 National Cooperative Policy, 2002, Ministry of Cooperation,
Power, July 15, 2025,
https://www.cooperation.gov.in/sites/default/files/inline-
https://www.pib.gov.in/PressReleasePage.aspx?PRID=2144822.
files/National-Cooperation-Policy-2002.pdf.
36 The Environment (Protection) Fourth Amendment Rules, 2025,
18 “Cabinet approves Central Sector Scheme “Grant in aid to National
Ministry of Environment, Forest, and Climate Change, July 11, 2025,
Cooperative Development Corporation (NCDC)” with an outlay of
https://egazette.gov.in/WriteReadData/2025/264545.pdf.
Rs 2,000 crore”, Press Information Bureau, July 31, 2025,
37 Environment (Protection) Act, 1986, https://cpcb.nic.in/env-
https://www.pib.gov.in/PressReleasePage.aspx?PRID=2150641.
protection-act/.
19 The National Cooperative Development Corporation Act, 1962.
38 The Environment (Protection) Amendment Rules, 2015, Ministry
20 “Cabinet approves the Prime Minister Dhan Dhaanya Krishi
of Environment, Forest, and Climate Change,
Yojana”, Press Information Bureau, Ministry of Agriculture and
https://egazette.gov.in/WriteReadData/2015/167141.pdf .
Farmers Welfare, July 16, 2025,
39 The Environment (Protection) Third Amendment Rules, 2024,
https://www.pib.gov.in/PressReleasePage.aspx?PRID=2145147.
Ministry of Environment, Forest, and Climate Change, December 30,
21 "PM Dhan-Dhaanya Krishi Yojana", Press Information Bureau,
2024, https://egazette.gov.in/WriteReadData/2024/259752.pdf.
Ministry of Agriculture and Farmers Welfare, July 19, 2025,
40 Hazardous and Other Wastes (Management and Transboundary
https://www.pib.gov.in/PressNoteDetails.aspx?id=154909&NoteId=1
Movement) Amendment Rules, 2025, Ministry of Environment,
54909&ModuleId=3.
Forest, and Climate Change, July 1, 2025,
22 Budget Speech, Union Budget of India, 2025-26,
https://egazette.gov.in/WriteReadData/2025/264308.pdf.
https://www.indiabudget.gov.in/doc/Budget_Speech.pdf.
41 Environment (Protection) Act, 1986, Ministry of Environment,
23 “Cabinet approves total outlay of Rs.6520 crore including
Forest, and Climate Change, May 23, 1986, https://cpcb.nic.in/env-
additional outlay of Rs.1920 crore for ongoing Central Sector
protection-act/.
Scheme “Pradhan Mantri Kisan Sampada Yojana” (PMKSY) during
42 The Remediation of Contaminated Sites Rules, 2025, Ministry of
15th Finance Commission Cycle (2021-22 to 2025-26)”, Press
Environment, Forest, and Climate Change, July 24, 2025,
Information Bureau, Cabinet, July 31, 2025,
https://egazette.gov.in/WriteReadData/2025/264959.pdf.
https://www.pib.gov.in/PressReleasePage.aspx?PRID=2150644.
43 Offshore Areas Atomic Minerals Operating Right Rules, 2025,
24 About Us – Pradhan Mantri Kisan Sampada Yojana, as accessed on
https://egazette.gov.in/WriteReadData/2025/264709.pdf.
July 31, 2025, https://www.mofpi.gov.in//Schemes/pradhan-mantri-
44 Offshore Areas Mineral (Development and Regulation) Act, 2002,
kisan-sampada-yojana.
https://mines.gov.in/admin/download/642d05c52d8361680672197.pd
25 The National Sports Governance Bill, 2025, Ministry of Youth and
f.
Sports Affairs, July 23, 2025,
45 The Atomic Minerals Concession Rules, 2016,
https://sansad.in/getFile/BillsTexts/LSBillTexts/Asintroduced/sports7
https://www.indiacode.nic.in/handle/123456789/1362/simple-
232025123349PM.pdf?source=legislation.
search?query=The%20Atomic%20Minerals%20Concession%20Rule
26 The National Anti-Doping (Amendment) Bill, 2025, Ministry of
s,%202016&searchradio=rules.
Youth Affairs and Sports, July 23, 2025,
46 Unified Waqf Management, Empowerment, Efficiency and
https://prsindia.org/files/bills_acts/bills_parliament/2025/National_A
Development Rules, 2025, Ministry of Minority Affairs, July 03,
nti-Doping(A)_Bill_2025.pdf.
2025, https://egazette.gov.in/WriteReadData/2025/264358.pdf.
27 The National Anti-Doping Act, 2022, Ministry of Law and Justice,
47 Report No. 15: Devolution of funds under Panchayati Raj System,
August 12, 2022,
Standing Committee on Rural Development and Panchayati Raj, July
https://prsindia.org/files/bills_acts/acts_parliament/2022/The%20Nati
29, 2025,
onal%20Anti%20Doping%20Act%202022.pdf.
https://sansad.in/getFile/lsscommittee/Rural%20Development%20an
28 “Cabinet approves National Sports Policy 2025”, Press Information
d%20Panchayati%20Raj/18_Rural_Development_and_Panchayati_R
Bureau, Cabinet, July 1, 2025,
aj_15.pdf?source=loksabhadocs.
https://www.pib.gov.in/PressReleasePage.aspx?PRID=2141138.
29 Khelo Bharat Niti 2025, Ministry of Youth and Sports Affairs, July DISCLAIMER: This document is being furnished to you for your
information. You may choose to reproduce or redistribute this report
2025, https://yas.gov.in/sites/default/files/Khelo-Bharat-Niti-
for non-commercial purposes in part or in full to any other person
2025_0.pdf.
30 “Cabinet Approves Research Development and Innovation (RDI) with due acknowledgement of PRS Legislative Research (“PRS”).
The opinions expressed herein are entirely those of the author(s).
Scheme to scale up Research, Development and Innovation in
PRS makes every effort to use reliable and comprehensive
Strategic and Sunrise Domains”, Press Information Bureau, Cabinet,
information, but PRS does not represent that the contents of the
July 1, 2025,
report are accurate or complete. PRS is an independent, not-for-
https://www.pib.gov.in/PressReleasePage.aspx?PRID=2141130.
profit group. This document has been prepared without regard to the
31 Comprehensive Cyber Security Audit Policy Guidelines, the Indian
objectives or opinions of those who may receive it.
Computer Emergency Response Team, Ministry of Electronics and
Information Technology, July 25, 2025,
- 13 -
