Monthly Policy Review
March 2024
Highlights of this Issue
General elections to be held in seven phases between April 19 and June 1 (p. 2)
The Election Commission of India released the schedule for the general elections to Lok Sabha and four state
assemblies. Votes for Lok Sabha will be counted on June 4, 2024.
High Level Committee recommends simultaneous elections (p. 2)
At the time of the next election for Lok Sabha, all state assemblies and local bodies should be dissolved as a one-time
measure. Thereafter, in case of a hung legislature, elections to that legislature should be held for a reduced term.
SC strikes down immunity to legislators for accepting bribes for votes and speeches (p. 3)
The Court held that immunity for such acts is not integral to the functioning of the House or discharging the
duties of a legislator. With this, it overturned a 1998 verdict that granted such immunity to legislators.
Current account deficit at 1.2% of GDP in third quarter of 2023-24 (p. 2)
Current account deficit in the third quarter of 2023-24 was lower than the 2% of GDP recorded in the corresponding
quarter of 2022-23.
Amendment to Citizenship Rules notified (p. 3)
The amendment specifies the process for obtaining citizenship for the groups that were extended citizenship under the
Citizenship (Amendment) Act, 2019. It specifies the documents that must be provided with citizenship applications.
Scheme to encourage domestic manufacturing of electric vehicles notified (p. 9)
The scheme will offer manufacturers incentives in the form of reduced duties on imported electric vehicles.
Manufacturers must commit to set up manufacturing in India within five years and invest at least Rs 4,150 crore.
Committee submits report on digital competition law (p. 5)
The Committee on Digital Competition Law recommended enacting the Digital Competition Act to regulate
large digital enterprises in ex-ante manner.
Cinematograph (Certification) Rules, 2024 notified (p. 3)
The Rules give to effect provisions of the Cinematograph (Amendment) Act, 2023. These include age markers for
U/A certification. The Rules also require one-third of the members of the Board of Film Certification to be women.
Pharmaceuticals Technology Upgradation Assistance Scheme revised (p. 11)
The revised scheme supports newer technological upgrades such as clean room facilities and effluent treatment.
In addition to MSMEs, pharma manufacturing units with turnover below Rs 500 crore will also be covered.
IRDAI issues regulations related to insurance products and policyholders’ interests (p. 7)
The regulations seek to institute a framework to design insurance products, lay down principles for serving
policyholders, and set up an online marketplace for insurance policies.
Guidelines issued for various schemes under the National Green Hydrogen Mission (p. 12)
Guidelines have been issued for the research and development scheme, electrolyser manufacturing scheme, scheme for
setting up hydrogen hubs, and the scheme for up-skilling individuals.
India signs trade agreement with European Free Trade Association (p. 14)
The EFTA comprises Switzerland, Norway, Iceland and Liechtenstein. The EFTA will commit to FDI of USD 100
billion in the next 15 years. India will provide tariff concessions on certain goods such as garments and machinery.
April 1, 2024
PRS Legislative Research Institute for Policy Research Studies
3rd Floor, Gandharva Mahavidyalaya 212, Deen Dayal Upadhyaya Marg  New Delhi – 110002
Tel: (011) 23234801, 43434035  www.prsindia.org
Monthly Policy Review – March 2024 PRS Legislative Research
Elections  Currently, a legislature is elected for the term of
five years. Hence, a hung legislature at any point
Arpita Mallick (arpita@prsindia.org) of time could necessitate mid-term elections. This
would render the legislature out of synchronisation
Schedule of elections to Lok Sabha and four for the next simultaneous election. To address this
State Assemblies announced issue, the Committee recommended that in such
cases, fresh elections should be held for a reduced
The Election Commission of India announced the
term. The reduced term will be equivalent to the
schedule for the general elections to Lok Sabha, and
remaining period of the five-year cycle till the next
elections to four state Legislative Assemblies.1 The
simultaneous election. For example, if fresh
elections to Lok Sabha will be held in seven phases
elections to a state Assembly or Lok Sabha is held
from April 19, 2024 to June 1, 2024. Votes will be
two years after the simultaneous election, its term
counted on June 4, 2024.
will be only three years. This will synchronise all
Elections to the Legislative Assemblies of Andhra elections every five years.
Pradesh, Arunachal Pradesh, Odisha and Sikkim will
For a PRS summary of the report, see here.
take place at the same time as elections to Lok Sabha.
Votes will be counted on June 4, 2024 for Andhra
Pradesh and Odisha, and on June 2, 2024 for Arunachal
Pradesh and Sikkim.2
Macroeconomic Development
High Level Committee recommends
Tushar Chakrabarty (tushar@prsindia.org)
simultaneous elections
The High-Level Committee (Chair: Former President Current account deficit at 1.2% of GDP in
Mr. Ram Nath Kovind) constituted by the central third quarter of 2023-24
government submitted its report on simultaneous
elections.3 The committee was constituted in India recorded a current account deficit of USD 10.5
September 2023. Its terms of reference included billion (1.2% of GDP) in the third quarter (October-
examining feasibility and suggesting a framework for December) of 2023-24, lower than USD 16.8 billion
conducting elections to Lok Sabha, state Assemblies, (2% of GDP) in the corresponding quarter of 2022-23.4
and local bodies at the same time. Key observations In the second quarter (July-September) of 2023-24, the
and recommendations of the Committee include: current account deficit was USD 11.4 billion (1.3% of
GDP).
 Rationale for simultaneous elections: The
Committee recommended that simultaneous The capital account registered a net inflow of USD 17.4
elections be held in the country. It observed that billion in the third quarter of 2023-24 as compared to a
simultaneous elections will help reduce costs. net inflow of USD 28.9 billion in the third quarter of
Frequent elections create an atmosphere of 2022-23. In the second quarter of 2023-24, net inflow
uncertainty. Simultaneous elections will ensure into the capital account was USD 13 billion.
stability and predictability in governance by
Foreign exchange reserves increased by USD 6 billion
minimising disruption and policy paralysis caused
in the third quarter of 2023-24, lower than USD 11.1
by the enforcement of the Model Code of Conduct.
billion in the corresponding quarter of 2022-23. In the
It also noted that voter participation will increase.
second quarter of 2023-24, foreign exchange reserves
It cited a research paper which observed that
increased by USD 2.5 billion.
simultaneous elections lead to higher economic
growth, lower inflation, increased investments, and Table 1: Balance of payments, Q3 2023-24 (USD
improved quality of government expenditure. billion)
Q3 2022- Q2 2023- Q3 2023-
 Implementation of simultaneous elections: The
23 24 24
Committee recommended a framework for holding a. Exports 105.6 108.3 106.7
simultaneous elections which will require
b. Imports 176.9 172.8 178.3
Constitutional amendments. At the time of the
c. Trade balance (a-b) -71.3 -64.5 -71.6
next general election to Lok Sabha, all state
d. Net services 38.7 39.9 45.0
assemblies and local bodies should be dissolved,
irrespective of the remaining term as a one-time e. Other transfers 15.8 13.2 16.1
measure. This will synchronise all elections. The f. Current account -16.8 -11.4 -10.5
Committee recommended holding elections for (c+d+e)
Lok Sabha and all state assemblies at the same g. Capital account 28.9 13.0 17.4
time, and that of local bodies within 100 days from h. Errors and omissions -1.0 0.9 -0.8
these elections. i. Change in reserves 11.1 2.5 6.0
(f+g+h)
Source: RBI; PRS.
- 2-
Monthly Policy Review – March 2024 PRS Legislative Research
Law and Justice Bangladesh. These include copy of passport, birth
certificate, any type of identity document, license
Rutvik Upadhyaya (rutvik@prsindia.org) or land records. The applicant must also provide
any one of the specified documents that proves he
Supreme Court strikes down immunity to entered India on or before December 31, 2014.
legislators for accepting bribes for votes or These include copy of the visa and immigration
speeches inside a legislature stamp on arrival in India, ration card issued in
India, rental agreement registered in India,
The Constitution grants Members of Parliament (MPs)
insurance policies issued in India, or any letter
and Members of State Legislatures (MLAs/MLCs)
issued by the government or Court to the applicant
immunity from criminal prosecution for their speeches
with official stamp. All such records will be
and votes in the legislature (under Articles 105 and
admissible even beyond their validity. An
194).5 In 1998, the Supreme Court heard a case of
applicant must also submit an eligibility certificate
bribes given to MPs for a vote on a no-confidence
declaring their religion. This must be attested by a
motion in Parliament.6 It held that MPs who took a
locally reputed community institution.
bribe to cast their vote in the House have immunity
from criminal prosecution under Article 105(2). The  Verification and grant of citizenship: A District-
reasoning was that the act of taking the bribe and level Committee, headed by the jurisdictional
casting the vote are related, and therefore, the immunity Senior Superintendent or Superintendent of Post,
for the vote is extended to the bribe. The court further will verify the application and administer the oath
said that an MP who took a bribe but abstained from of allegiance.11 It will submit the relevant
voting in the House does not enjoy such immunity. documents to an Empowered Committee, headed
by the Director of Census Operations of a State or
In a separate case related to allegation of bribery on a UT, for verification.11 If satisfied, the Empowered
MLA, a seven-judge bench of the Court has analysed
Committee will grant citizenship to the applicant.
the 1998 judgement. It has overruled the 1998
Under the 2009 Rules, applications are submitted
judgement.7 It noted that the 1998 judgement creates a
to the relevant Collector. He verifies the
paradox where a legislator has immunity when he
application and then forwards it to the state
accepts a bribe and votes as agreed upon. However, a
government or UT administration. The application
legislator who agrees to accept a bribe, but eventually
is then sent to the central government, which
votes independently is prosecuted.
grants citizenship after completing all inquiries.
The Court has held that a legislator cannot seek
immunity under Articles 105 and 194 from prosecution
on a charge of bribery in connection with a vote or
speech in the legislature. The offence of bribery is
Information and Broadcasting
independent of the performance of the agreed action. It
does not matter whether the vote is cast as agreed or if
Pratinav Damani (pratinav@prsindia.org)
the vote is cast at all. The offence of bribery is
complete when the legislator accepts the bribe. Cinematograph (Certification) Rules, 2024
notified
The Ministry of Information and Broadcasting notified
the Cinematograph (Certification) Rules, 2024.12 The
Home Affairs
Rules replace the Cinematograph (Certification) Rules,
1983 and retain most of its provisions.13 The Rules
Rutvik Upadhyaya (rutvik@prsindia.org)
have been framed under the Cinematograph Act,
1952.14 They give effect to the provisions of the
Amendment to Citizenship Rules notified
Cinematograph (Amendment) Act, 2023.15 Key
The Ministry of Home Affairs notified the Citizenship features of the Rules include:
(Amendment) Rules, 2024.8 These amend the
 UA certification: The Cinematograph
Citizenship Rules, 2009 to provide the process for
(Amendment) Act, 2023 introduced markers
citizenship as per the Citizenship (Amendment) Act,
indicating age appropriateness for UA certification.
2019.9,10 The 2019 Amendment Act makes illegal
These are: (i) UA 7+, (ii) UA13+, and (iii) UA
migrants, who are Hindus, Parsis, Buddhists, Jains,
16+. These allow for unrestricted public
Christians, or Sikhs from Afghanistan, Pakistan, or
exhibition, subject to guidance of parents, for
Bangladesh, eligible for citizenship. They must have
children below the specified age threshold. The
entered India on or before December 31, 2014. Key
Rules give effect to these changes under the Act.
features of the 2024 Rules include:
 Approving authority for content: The 2024
 Documents required: The applicant must provide
Rules add that the approving authority for
a copy of any one proof of nationality issued by
certification will be different based on the type and
the government of Afghanistan, Pakistan or
- 3-
Monthly Policy Review – March 2024 PRS Legislative Research
length of the content. For instance, long theatrical  Appellate process: Appeals against orders of
releases (more than 72 minutes) will be approved authorised officers may be made before the
by the Chairperson of the Board, whereas the appellate authority. The appellate authority
dubbed version of the same will be approved by appointed must be the level of: (i) Deputy
the concerned Regional Officer. Currently, the Secretary or Deputy Director of the central
Board has nine regional offices. government, or (ii) District Magistrate of the
relevant district. Appeals must be filed within 30
 Representation of women in Board: The 1983
days of the order by the authorised officer. The
Rules stated that the central government may take
appellate authority, where possible, shall decide
steps to ensure the representation of women in the
appeals within six months.
Board and advisory panels. Advisory panels are
constituted at a regional level for the examination Comments are invited until April 14, 2024.
of films. The 2024 Rules specify that one-third of
the members of the Board and advisory panels Guidelines for accessibility standards for
must be women. Also, women should preferably public exhibition of films released
comprise half of the Board and advisory panels.
The Ministry of Information and Broadcasting released
 Invitation of experts for certification: The Rules Guidelines for Accessibility Standards in the Public
allow the Regional Officer to invite one or more Exhibition of Feature Films in Cinema Theatres for
subject or language experts in the field of film for Persons with Hearing and Visual Impairment.18 The
the examination of a film. If the experts are not Guidelines have been issued under the Rights of
invited for the initial screening, the content may be Persons with Disabilities Act, 2016.19 The Guidelines
re-screened for the experts, without any additional are applicable to films certified by the Board of Film
cost to the applicant. Certification for exhibition in cinemas. Key features of
the Guidelines include:
Comments invited on draft Cinematograph
 Accessibility standards: The Guidelines
(Adjudication of Penalty) Rules 2024
prescribe standards for audio descriptions and
The Ministry of Information and Broadcasting has closed/open captions. Standards include: (i)
released the draft Cinematograph (Adjudication of keeping audio descriptions concise, and (ii)
Penalty) Rules, 2024 for public feedback.16 The Rules ensuring that captions are accurate, synchronised
prescribe the manner in which penalties will be levied with video, and complete. The Guidelines also lay
by an authorised officer and the procedure for appeals. down standards for the use of sign language
Penalties are levied for violations of the provisions of superimposed in movies.
the Cinematograph Act, 1952.17 These include: (i)
 Implementation of standards: Accessibility
tampering a film after certification, (ii) exhibition of a
features will be provided by the producer of the
non-certified film, and (iii) showcasing films rated ‘A’
film. While applying for certification, the digital
to minors. Key features of the draft Rules include:
cinema package must contain relevant files for
 Officers authorised to decide penalties: The audio descriptions, closed/open captioning, and
central and state government may authorise sign language. The Guidelines also prescribe
officers at Under-Secretary level or above, for methods of deploying the features in theatres using
deciding penalties. State governments may also additional equipment. These include: (i) using
authorise officers equal to or above the rank of: (i) headphones/earphones for audio captions, (ii)
Additional District Magistrates, (ii) Additional using mobile apps for captions or descriptions, or
Collectors, or (iii) Additional Deputy (iii) smart glasses for captions. At least two to five
Commissioners of a district. equipment must be available per 200 seats. The
equipment must be provided by the theatre.
 Powers of authorised officers: Authorised
officers shall exercise certain powers to investigate  Feature films must include accessibility features,
violations. These include: (i) entering or and cinema theatres must provide accessibility
authorising another officer to enter a place of equipment, within two years of the Guidelines
exhibition, (ii) summoning individuals related to being issued. However, feature films that require
the case, and (iii) order for evidence considered certification in more than one language must
relevant, such as CCTV footage and ticket scans. include at least one accessibility feature for the
hearing and visually impaired (each) within six
 Factors determining quantum of penalty:
months of the issuance of the Guidelines. Films
Authorised officers must give due regard to the
submitted for consideration at film festivals
following factors while deciding a penalty under
organised by the Ministry of Information and
the Act: (i) nature of the violation, (ii) amount of
Broadcasting must include closed captions and
disproportionate gain or advantage made due to the
audio descriptions by January 1, 2025.
violation, and (iii) repetition of the violation. The
order deciding the penalty must be passed within
90 days of issuing the notice.
- 4-
Monthly Policy Review – March 2024 PRS Legislative Research
Corporate Affairs Comments on the report and the draft bill are invited by
April 15, 2024.21
Tushar Chakrabarty (tushar@prsindia.org)
For a PRS summary of the report, see here.
Report on digital competition law submitted,
Competition Commission of India notifies
along with a draft Digital Competition Bill
commitment and settlement regulations
The Committee on Digital Competition Law was
The Competition Commission of India (CCI) notified
constituted to evaluate the need for an ex-ante
competition framework for digital markets in India.20 the Competition Commission of India (Commitment)
Regulations, 2024, and the Competition Commission of
In its report, the Committee also published a draft Bill
India (Settlement) Regulations, 2024.22,23 These
to give effect to its recommendations. Observations
Regulations have been notified under the Competition
and recommendations of the Committee include:
Act, 2002, which was amended in 2023 to provide for
 Need for ex-ante regulation of digital the commitment and settlement commitment
competition: The Committee noted that the framework.24,25 The amended Act allows enterprises to
current ex-post framework (intervening after an offer certain commitments (such as change in market
event occurs) under the Competition Act, 2002, behaviour) or pay settlement. This applies to entities
does not facilitate timely redressal of anti- against whom inquiry has been initiated by CCI for
competitive conduct by digital enterprises. It anti-competitive agreements or abusing their dominant
observed that the present framework may not be position. Key features of the 2024 Regulations include:
effective to address the irreversible tipping of
▪ Commitment: A commitment application must
markets in favour of large digital enterprises
be filed with CCI within 45 days from receiving
(permanent dominance of a firm in relevant
the order passed by CCI to initiate investigation.
market). The Committee recommended enacting
The CCI may pass orders agreeing to or rejecting
the Digital Competition Act to enable the
the commitments offered. The entire process must
Competition Commission of India (CCI) to
be completed in 130 working days from the receipt
selectively regulate large digital enterprises in an
of the commitment application. CCI’s order on the
ex-ante manner (intervening before an event
commitment will not be considered as a finding of
occurs). The proposed legislation should only
contravention against the applicant. The
regulate enterprises that have a significant presence
effectiveness of the commitments offered will be
and the ability to influence Indian digital market.
measured against factors such as: (i) nature,
 Systemically Significant Digital Enterprises duration, and extent of the alleged contravention,
(SSDEs): The Committee noted that certain (ii) if the commitment terms address the
features of digital markets allow digital enterprises competition concerns, and (iii) if the commitment
to swiftly gain influence. These features include: terms make the markets more competitive.
(i) collection of user data which can allow large
▪ Settlement: A settlement application must be
incumbent enterprises to enter related markets, (ii)
made within 45 days from receiving the
network effects where utility of a service increases
investigation report of the Director General of CCI
when number of users consuming the service
into the alleged contraventions. CCI can pass
increases, and (iii) economies of scale wherein
orders agreeing to or rejecting the settlement
incumbents can offer digital services at lower costs
proposal. The entire process must be completed
as compared to new entrants. The Committee
within 180 working days from the receipt of the
recommended designating entities offering certain
settlement application. The settlement amount
core digital services as SSDEs for ex-ante
would be determined by applying a discount of
regulation, which are susceptible to market
15% on a base amount. This base amount can
concentration. These include search engines,
extend to the maximum penalty that can be levied
social networking services, operating systems, and
by CCI in cases of anti-competitive agreements or
web browsers.
abuse of dominant position. The settlement order
 Obligations of SSDEs: The draft Digital passed by the CCI will not be considered as a
Competition Bill, 2024, as recommended by the finding of contravention against the applicant.
Committee, prohibits SSDEs from carrying out
certain practices. These include: (i) favouring their Ministry of Corporate Affairs revises threshold
own products and services or those of related
for regulation of combinations
parties, (ii) use non-public data of business users
operating on their core digital service to compete The Ministry of Corporate Affairs revised the
with those users, (iii) restrict users from using minimum threshold of assets and turnover for
third-party applications on their core digital regulation of combinations under the Competition Act,
services, and (iv) requiring or incentivising users 2002.24,26,27 The Act provides the minimum threshold
of an identified core digital service to use other value of assets and turnover for combinations
products or services offered by the SSDE. (implying mergers, acquisitions, or amalgamation of
- 5-
Monthly Policy Review – March 2024 PRS Legislative Research
enterprises). Combinations falling above this threshold issued to a customer is decided by the issuer. RBI has
are examined by the Competition Commission of India observed that some arrangements between card
to ensure that they would not lead to an adverse effect networks and card issuers are not conducive for
on market competition. The Act empowers the central customer choice. RBI has decided that: (i) issuers will
government to change this threshold every two years not enter into agreements with card networks that
based on wholesale price index, fluctuations in restrain the issuers to avail services of other card
exchange rate, or other relevant factors. networks, and (ii) issuers must provide an option to
eligible customers to choose from multiple card
Table 2: Changes in thresholds for domestic
networks at the time of issue. These directions will not
combinations (Rs crore)
apply to issuers who issue credit cards on their own
Criterion Old New
card networks. Issuers with up to 10 lakh active cards
Enterprise Level will also not be required to provide the option to their
Assets 2,000 2,500 customers to choose their card networks.
Turnover 6,000 7,500
Group level RBI issues framework for self-regulatory
Assets 8,000 24,000 organisations
Turnover 10,000 30,000
The Reserve Bank of India (RBI) released a framework
Source: S.O. 1130(E), Ministry of Corporate Affairs.
for recognising self-regulatory organisations (SROs)
for regulated entities.31 RBI noted that with the
increase in number and scale of regulated entities, a
need was felt to develop better industry standards for
Finance self-regulation. Entities regulated by the RBI include
banks, non-banking finance companies, and payment
Tushar Chakrabarty (tushar@prsindia.org) system operators. SROs can improve effectiveness of
regulations through technical expertise and aid in
RBI amends directions for issuance and framing regulatory policies. Key features include:
conduct for credit and debit cards
 Process for recognition: An interested SRO may
The Reserve Bank of India (RBI) notified amendments apply to RBI for recognition. For this, it must
to the RBI (Credit Card and Debit Card – Issuance and meet certain eligibility criteria. These include: (i)
Conduct) Directions, 2022.28,29 The 2022 Directions being registered as a not-for-profit company, (ii)
provide the framework for issuance and conduct of representing the sector and having specified
credit and debit card business. Key features of the membership, and (iii) its directors must have
amendments include: professional competence and have general
reputation of fairness and integrity.
▪ Business credit cards: The Directions allow
issuers to issue business credit cards to business  Adherence to specified principles: An SRO
entities/individuals for business expenses. The should: (i) derive authority from membership
amendments specify that issuers must put in place agreements to set ethical and governance
mechanisms to monitor the end use of funds. standards, (ii) establish objective and consultative
processes to make rules for conduct of its
▪ Form of credit cards: Currently, banks are
members, (iii) develop standards for improving
allowed to issue debit cards to users in other forms
compliance culture, and (iv) have surveillance
such as wearables instead of plastic cards. The
methods for effective monitoring of the sector.
amendments allow banks to issue credit cards in
other forms as well.  Responsibilities towards members: The primary
responsibility of the SRO towards its members will
▪ Blocking of cards: If issuers block, deactivate, or
be to promote best business practices. Other
suspend a card at their discretion, they must follow
responsibilities include: (i) framing and monitoring
a standard operating procedure. Such actions must
adherence to the code of conduct for its members,
also be immediately communicated to the
(ii) developing a uniform and non-discriminatory
cardholder along with reasons through electronic
membership fee structure, (iii) establishing a
and other modes.
grievance redressal and dispute
resolution/arbitration framework for its members,
RBI allows customers to choose card networks
and (iv) promoting knowledge of statutory/
for credit cards regulatory provisions.
The Reserve Bank of India (RBI) has allowed  Membership criteria: SROs should have a good
customers to choose card networks for credit cards.30 mix of members at all levels to represent the sector
Currently, authorised card networks (such as holistically. The membership criteria will be
MasterCard and Visa) tie-up with banks and non-banks prescribed by RBI. Membership to an SRO will be
for issuance of credit cards. The network for a card voluntary. The minimum prescribed membership
- 6-
Monthly Policy Review – March 2024 PRS Legislative Research
must be attained within two years from the grant of  Free look period: Policyholders of life and
recognition to the SRO. individual health insurance policies must be
provided with a 30-day free look period from the
IRDAI notifies regulations for insurance date of receiving the policy document. If the
products policyholder disagrees with any conditions of the
policy within this period, he may choose to cancel
The Insurance Regulatory and Development Authority the policy. On cancellation of the policy, the
of India (IRDAI) notified the IRDAI (Insurance premium paid must be refunded to the
Products) Regulations, 2024.32 The Regulations policyholder. Currently, a free look period of 15
provide a framework for designing insurance products days is allowed in case of physical policies and 30
and sets up committees to design the products. It seeks days for electronic policies and those obtained
to repeal several regulations including: (i) the IRDAI through distance mode.37
(Micro Insurance) Regulations, 2015, (ii) the IRDAI
(Health Insurance) Regulations, 2016, and (iii) the  Issuance of insurance policies: All insurers must
IRDAI (Unit Linked Insurance Products) Regulations, have a board-approved policy regarding issuance
2019.33,34,35 Key features include: of insurance policies in the electronic form. It
should cover: (i) measures to safeguard data
 Design and pricing: Design and pricing of privacy, (ii) framework on data security, and (iii)
insurance products must adhere to certain criteria. continuous review and upgradation of cyber
These include: (i) ensuring evolving risk coverage security safeguards.
needs of customers, (ii) simple-to-understand
products, (iii) premium rates not being excessive,
IRDAI issues insurance electronic marketplace
inadequate, or discriminatory, and (iv) factoring in
regulations
all relevant risks while pricing products.
The Insurance Regulatory and Development Authority
 Product Management Committee: The Board of
of India (IRDAI) notified the IRDAI (Bima Sugam –
every insurer must constitute a Product
Insurance Electronic Marketplace) Regulations, 2024.38
Management Committee. Responsibilities of the
Bima Sugam will be a digital public infrastructure for
Committee include ensuring: (i) appropriate
purchasing insurance policies, settling claims, and
product design for the target market, (ii) regulatory
grievance redressal. Key features include:
compliance, (iii) periodic reviews of product
performance, and (iv) modification or withdrawal  Establishment: Bima Sugam will be established
of the product, if required. by a not-for-profit company formed under the
Companies Act, 2013. The company will be
 Review of products: All insurance products must
responsible for operating and maintaining the
be reviewed at least once a year by the appointed
electronic marketplace. The company’s
actuary. The review should consider: (i)
shareholding will be distributed amongst life
reasonable expectations of all stakeholders, (ii)
insurers, general insurers, and health insurers.
financial viability of the product, (iii) emerging
risk and experience under the product, and (iv) any  Functions: The functions of the electronic
other relevant factors. marketplace and the company include: (i) creating
end-to-end digital solutions for the insurance
IRDAI issues regulations for protection of sector, (ii) implementing consent-based
interest of policyholders architecture for its services, (iii) storing,
maintaining, and processing data as per applicable
The Insurance Regulatory and Development Authority laws, and (iv) allowing fair and open access to its
of India (IRDAI) notified the IRDAI (Protection of services. The company must have a self-
Policyholders’ Interests, Operations and Allied Matters sustainable revenue model. Customers will not be
of Insurers) Regulations, 2024.36 The Regulations charged for using the marketplace.
propose to supersede multiple regulations dealing with
subjects such as insurance premiums, issuance of
SEBI approves various decisions at board
insurance policies, and protection of policyholders’
meeting
interests. The Regulations will apply to all insurers and
distributors, barring entities engaged exclusively in the The Securities and Exchange Board of India (SEBI)
reinsurance business. Key features include: approved various decisions at its board meeting.39 Key
decisions include:
 Principles for serving policyholders: Insurers
must follow certain principles for servicing ▪ Same-day settlement: SEBI approved the launch
policyholders. These include: (i) providing the of same-day settlement for certain securities on a
necessary information about various services, (ii) pilot basis. The new framework will be reviewed
delivering services within a reasonable time, and at the end of three months and six months from the
(iii) not pressuring policyholders to change date of implementation, based on which SEBI will
products or switch providers. decide the future course of action.
- 7-
Monthly Policy Review – March 2024 PRS Legislative Research
▪ Exemption from additional disclosures for will consist of individuals with experience and
certain FPIs: SEBI approved exempting knowledge in the subject. Functions of the
additional disclosures for certain foreign portfolio committee include: (i) reviewing the need for
investors (FPIs). These FPIs must have more than change in index design or computation
50% of their Indian equity investments in a single methodology, (ii) overseeing the introduction of
corporate group. The disclosures relate to new financial benchmarks, and (iii) reviewing the
ownership, economic interest, or control in the procedures for discontinuation of an index.
FPI.40 In case of concentrated holding of FPIs in
▪ Quality of the index: The index design must
listed companies with no identified promoters, two
represent the underlying interest which the index
conditions must be met for exemption from
seeks to measure. The index must be calculated
additional disclosures. The first condition is that
using data that is sufficient to represent the
the FPI does not hold more than 50% of its Indian
underlying interest. Guidelines regarding data
equity investments in the corporate group. This
inputs and the manner of using the data must be
would exclude its investment in the parent
available in the public domain.
company with no promoter. The second condition
is that the composite FPI holdings in the company ▪ Dispute resolution: The index provider must
with no identified promoter is less than 3% of its create a dispute resolution mechanism for disputes
total equity capital. between the index provider and subscribers.
▪ Relaxations for listed companies: Amendments
SEBI introduces framework for small and
to the SEBI (Listing Obligations and Disclosure
medium REITs
Requirements) Regulations, 2015 were approved
to facilitate ease of doing business. These include:
The Securities and Exchange Board of India (SEBI)
(i) determining market capitalisation based
notified amendments to the SEBI (Real Estate
compliances for listed companies on the basis of Investment Trusts) Regulations, 2014.42,43 Real Estate
average market capitalisation of six months instead
Investment Trusts (REITs) pool money from investors
of a single day, (ii) extending the timeline for
to invest in real estate assets. Income from such assets
filling vacancies of key managerial personnel from
is then distributed among the investors. Key changes
three months to six months, and (iii) increasing the
under the 2024 amendments include:
permitted gap between two consecutive meetings
of the risk management committee from 180 days ▪ Definition of REIT: The 2014 Regulations define
to 210 days. REIT as a trust registered under the regulations.
The 2024 amendment specifies that REIT refers to
SEBI notifies regulations for index providers a person who pools at least Rs 50 crore from at
least 200 investors to acquire and manage real
The Securities and Exchange Board of India (SEBI) estate assets or properties. This would entitle the
notified the SEBI (Index Providers) Regulations, investors to receive income generated from such
2024.41 Index providers are persons who control the assets without giving them management control.
creation, operation, and administration of a benchmark
▪ Small and medium REIT: Assets that can be
or index (such as those tracking stocks or
acquired under a scheme of small and medium
commodities). It includes: (i) calculation of the index,
REITs will be of value between Rs 50 crore and Rs
(ii) determining the index methodology, and (iii)
500 crore. It should have at least 200 unitholders,
dissemination of the index. The Regulations will apply
excluding the investment manager of the REIT, its
to index providers that administer significant indices of
related parties, and associates.
securities listed on a recognised Indian stock exchange
for use in Indian securities market. Significant indices ▪ Eligibility: For registration, the small and
are those that are tracked by mutual fund schemes with medium REIT must meet certain criteria such as:
a specified amount of assets under management. Key (i) the registration application being made by the
features include: investment manager on the trust’s behalf, (ii) the
investment manager having a net worth of at least
▪ Registration: Index providers must register with
Rs 20 crore with at least two years’ experience in
SEBI. Existing index providers will have six
the real estate industry or in real estate fund
months to apply for the registration. Applicants
management, and (iii) at least half of the directors
must meet certain eligibility criteria such as: (i)
of the investment manager are independent.
must be an entity incorporated under the
Companies Act, 2013, (ii) have a minimum net
worth of Rs 25 crore, and (iii) they possess the
necessary infrastructure and human resources to
conduct the business of an index provider.
▪ Oversight committee: The index provider must
form an oversight committee to govern the
benchmark determination process. The committee
- 8-
Monthly Policy Review – March 2024 PRS Legislative Research
Industry category of the EV. The scheme will mainly cover
commercial vehicles and those used for public
transport. However, two wheeler EVs owned
Scheme to promote domestic manufacturing of
privately or by corporates will also be incentivised.
electric vehicles notified
 Claiming incentives: In order to claim the
Pratinav Damani (pratinav@prsindia.org)
incentive from the government, manufacturers
must meet certain criteria. These include: (i)
The Ministry of Heavy Industries notified the Scheme
registration with the Ministry of Heavy Industries
to Promote Manufacturing of Electric Passenger Cars
and approval for each of their electric vehicle
in India.44 The scheme will offer reduced import duty
models, (ii) each vehicle model satisfying
on Electric Vehicles (EVs) to global manufacturers,
minimum technical eligibility criteria for
provided that manufacturers commit to domestic
performance and efficiency, and (iii) the vehicle
manufacturing. Key features of the scheme include:
must be manufactured in India.
 Eligibility: The scheme is open to global
automotive manufacturers with a minimum annual
revenue of Rs 10,000 crore. The manufacturer
must commit to invest at least Rs 4,150 crore
Environment
(~USD 500 million) over a period of three years
for manufacturing EVs in India. The manufacturer
Tanvi Vipra (tanvi@prsindia.org)
must achieve 25% domestic value addition within
three years of approval, and 50% within five years.
Amendments to Plastic Waste Management
 Incentive: The scheme offers manufacturers a Rules, 2016 notified
reduced import duty of 15% on completely
The Ministry of Environment, Forest and Climate
imported EVs for five years from the date of
Change notified amendments to the Plastic Waste
approval. Currently, import duties range from
Management Rules, 2016.46,47 The Rules specify
70% to 100%. The imported EVs must have a
responsibilities of entities engaged in production and
minimum Cost, Insurance and Freight (CIF) value
sale of plastics. The amendments add obligations for
of USD 35,000. The number of EVs a
manufacturers of biodegradable plastic. Key features
manufacturer can import will be determined based
of the amendments include:
on: (i) the maximum duty foregone, and (ii) the
amount of committed investment.  Biodegradable plastic manufacturers: The
amendments change the definition of
 Bank guarantee: The manufacturer will be
biodegradable plastics from ‘plastic that
required to submit a bank guarantee of Rs 4,150
decomposes in ambient environment’ to plastic
crore or the quantum of duty forgone, whichever is
that decomposes in specific environments such as
higher. The guarantee will be invoked if the
landfills. Such plastics must bear separate
manufacturer fails to meet targets regarding
markings and labels issued by the Bureau of Indian
investment and domestic value addition.
Standards and the Food Safety and Standards
Authority of India. Manufacturers of
Electric Mobility Promotion Scheme notified
compostable/biodegradable plastic products must
Tushar Chakrabarty (tushar@prsindia.org) obtain a certificate from the Central Pollution
Control Board (CPCB) before marketing or selling.
The Ministry of Heavy Industries notified the Electric
 Entities obligated to fulfil EPR: Sellers and
Mobility Promotion Scheme, 2024.45 The scheme aims
manufacturers of plastic products are required to
to promote faster adoption of electric two and three-
fulfil extended producer responsibility (EPR)
wheeler vehicles (EVs) (including e-rickshaws). It will
obligations. These include reusing and recycling
have an outlay of Rs 500 crore. It will be implemented
plastic packaging, and disposing end-of-life
over four months between April and July 2024. This
plastics. The amendments also change which
scheme will be implemented on the conclusion of the
entities will be obligated to fulfil these
second phase of Faster Adoption and Manufacturing of
responsibilities. Under the 2016 Rules, obligated
Hybrid & Electric Vehicles in India (FAME) scheme
entities included producers of plastic packaging.
on March 31, 2024. Key features include:
The amendments exempt MSME producers.
 Incentive to consumers: Consumers will be able Certain obligations of MSME will be fulfilled by
to purchase EVs at a reduced price. The their raw material suppliers. However, the
manufacturer will be reimbursed by the central MSMEs will have to meet targets related to using
government for the sale of vehicles at such reduced recycled plastic. The amendments add
prices. Incentive of Rs 5,000 per kWh will be manufacturers/ importers of plastic raw material,
provided for two and three-wheeler EVs. The and manufacturers of biodegradable/ compostable
incentives will be capped depending on the plastic items as obligated entities.
- 9-
Monthly Policy Review – March 2024 PRS Legislative Research
 Trading EPR certificates: The Rules permit Health
trading EPR certificates. The amendments specify
that the price of the certificate will be determined
Uniform Code for pharmaceutical marketing
by the CPCB, subject to certain limits. The
practices released
minimum price will be 30% of the compensation
payable by non-complying entities, and the Rutvik Upadhyaya (rutvik@prsindia.org)
maximum price will be 100% of the compensation.
The Department of Pharmaceuticals released the
 Raw material for single use plastics: The
Uniform Code for Pharmaceutical Marketing Practices,
amendments prohibit manufacturers and importers
2024.51 The Code regulates the branding and
of plastic raw material from supplying to entities
promotion of pharmaceutical products in the country,
that manufacture single use plastic items that are
and establishes a committee to handle related
prohibited by law.
grievances. All Indian Pharmaceutical Associations are
required to upload the Code and provide the detailed
Amendments to Battery Waste Management
procedure for lodging complaints under the same, on
Rules, 2022 notified
their websites. Key features of the Code include:
The Ministry of Environment, Forest and Climate
 Promotion: Promotional material aimed at
Change notified amendments to the Battery Waste
healthcare professionals must contain details such
Management Rules, 2022.48,49,50 The Rules require
as: (i) the name of the relevant drug, (ii) active
battery producers to meet extended producer
ingredients, (iii) recommended dosage and method
responsibility (EPR) obligations related to recycling
of use, and (iv) possible side effects. Promotional
and refurbishing battery waste. EPR certificates may
material published in journals must not resemble
be traded to fulfil EPR obligations. Key features of the
their subject matter. No promotional material can
Amendments are:
use identifiers of any healthcare professional.
 Price of EPR certificates: Under the 2022 Rules,
 Brand reminders can only be disseminated through
the Central Pollution Control Board (CPCB) is
educational items (such as books and diaries)
responsible for regulating price of EPR certificates.
worth less than Rs 1,000 each and free drug
The CPCB must specify the minimum price and
samples. Brand reminders are items handed out by
the maximum price for the EPR certificates. The
a company to promote its products. Free samples
price must factor in the cost of collection,
should be handed over directly to a person who is
environmental compensation, and sound
qualified to prescribe it or someone authorised to
management of waste batteries.
receive it on their behalf. The quantity of such
 The amendments specify that the price of EPR samples must not exceed the prescribed dosage for
certificates will entirely depend on the three patients.
compensation to be levied on non-complying
 Claims: Claims about the usefulness of a drug
producers. Under the 2022 Rules, guidelines for
must be based on the latest evidence. Prohibited
the compensation are prepared by the CPCB and
claims include: (i) calling a drug or therapeutic
fixed by the Ministry. It is based on the ‘polluter
practice new if it has been generally available for
pays’ principle. As per the amendments, the
over a year, (ii) calling a drug safe without
minimum price of an EPR certificate will be 30%
qualification, and (iii) claiming it to be without
of the compensation, and the maximum price will
side-effects. The Code also prohibits non-
be 100% of compensation.
consensual use of brand names of products of other
 Guidelines on compensation: Under the 2022 companies, and deprecating them.
Rules, the CPCB is empowered to levy a
 Ethics Committee: An Ethics Committee for
compensation in case of non-compliance with EPR
pharma marketing practices must be set up in each
obligations. An implementation committee,
pharmaceutical association to address complaints
constituted by CPCB prepares and recommends
regarding compliance with the Code. It will
guidelines for imposing and collecting the
consist of three to five members. The Committee
compensation. As per the 2024 amendments,
should pass an order within 90 days of receiving a
CPCB will prepare and recommend the guidelines.
complaint. Violation of the Code will be punished
CPCB may consult the implementation committee
with penalties including: (i) monetary recovery, (ii)
during the process.
corrective statements in the media, or (iii)
expulsion from the association. An appeal against
the Committee’s decision can be filed within 15
days before an Apex Committee headed by the
secretary of the Department of Pharmaceuticals.
- 10-
Monthly Policy Review – March 2024 PRS Legislative Research
Revamped Pharmaceuticals Technology Secretary General of the Indian Pharmaceutical
Upgradation Assistance Scheme approved Alliance, and the Chief Executive Officer of the Indian
Drugs Manufacturer’s Association will be special
Tanvi Vipra (tanvi@prsindia.org)
invitees to the Committee.
The Ministry of Chemicals and Fertilisers approved the Terms of Reference of the Committee include: (i)
Revamped Pharmaceuticals Technology Upgradation institutional reforms in the NPPA, (ii) designing a price
Assistance Scheme.52 The original scheme sought to moderation framework for medical devices and
facilitate pharmaceutical MSMEs to meet national and emerging therapies, and (iii) balancing price and
international regulatory standards. It also provided availability of essential medicines. It will also draft a
interest subvention on capital loans.53 Key features of New Drugs and Medical Devices (Control) Order to
the revamped scheme include: give effect to its recommendations. The Committee
will submit its report in three months.
▪ Applicability expanded: Under the original
scheme, MSMEs were provided with interest
Regulations for new homoeopathic colleges,
subvention for meeting regulatory standards. The
courses, and expansion of seats notified
revamped scheme expands eligibility to include
pharmaceutical manufacturing units include those Rutvik Upadhyaya (rutvik@prsindia.org)
whose average three-year turnover is below Rs 500
crore. However, preference will be given to The National Commission for Homoeopathy released
MSMEs. An enterprise whose turnover is below the Establishment of New Homoeopathic Medical
Rs 250 crore is classified as an MSME.54 Institution (Opening of New or Higher Course of Study
or Training and Increase of Intake Capacity by a
▪ Support for complying with new standards:
Medical Institution), Regulations, 2024.56 These have
The revamped scheme supports a broader range of
been notified under the National Commission for
technological upgrades as global manufacturing
Homoeopathy Act, 2020 and replace the 2011
standards have been revised. Under the original
regulations.57,58 They provide criteria and norms to be
scheme, support was provided for upgrades such as
adhered to while opening new homoeopathic colleges,
heating, ventilation and air conditioning (HVAC)
offering new courses, and expanding academic intake.
systems, stability testing chambers, and automatic
Key features of the 2024 Regulations include:
particle counters for sterile areas. In addition to
support for these upgrades, the revised scheme will  Eligibility: For the purposes stated above, an
cover clean room facilities, effluent treatment, and institution must possess a no-objection certificate
water and steam utilities. from the state department of AYUSH or health.
Certificates granted for opening a new institution
▪ Turnover-based incentive structure: Incentive
or starting another course shall have a validity of
will be calculated as a percentage of actual
three years. Institutions must also obtain a consent
investment made. It will also be linked to the
of affiliation from a university. To introduce a
average turnover in the past three years (see Table
new course or expand intake, an institution must be
3). The incentive per entity will be capped at one
offering undergraduate courses for 5.5 years and
crore rupees.
post-graduate courses for three years.
Table 3: Incentive structure under the
 Institutions must also furnish bank guarantees to
Revamped Pharmaceuticals Scheme
the Commission depending upon the purpose of
Incentive (as % of
Turnover application. For instance, a guarantee of Rs 2.5
investment)
crore should be furnished for opening a new
Less than Rs 50 crore 20% institution. For expanding intake, this guarantee
Rs 50 - 250 crore 15% should be of five lakh rupees per postgraduate seat
Rs 250 - 500 crore 10% (PG) and four lakh rupees per 10 undergraduate
Sources: Press Information Bureau; PRS. seats (UG).
 Intake: The annual intake capacity will be a
Committee for reforms in pricing framework
maximum of 100 seats for UG courses and 10 seats
of drugs and medical devices constituted
for PG courses. The first permission for expanding
PG seats will be granted for seven seats.
Rutvik Upadhyaya (rutvik@prsindia.org)
 Infrastructure and staff: All medical institutions
The Department of Pharmaceuticals constituted a are required to comply with minimum standards of
committee for reforms in the pricing framework for infrastructure and staffing. These are specified
drugs and medical devices.55 The Committee will have under regulations governing minimum essential
three core members. These are the Secretary and standards for homoeopathic colleges and attached
Senior Economic Advisor of the Department of hospitals.59 New medical colleges must comply
Pharmaceuticals, and the Chairman of the National with these in a phased manner. For instance,
Pharmaceutical Pricing Authority (NPPA). The before the admission of the first batch of students,
- 11-
Monthly Policy Review – March 2024 PRS Legislative Research
an institution must have facilities such as: (i) a Homoeopathy. Providing forged information,
fully functioning homoeopathic hospital for at least having ghost teachers, or failing to rectify
one year, (ii) a fully functional pharmacy, (iii) all deficiencies in time can attract a monetary penalty.
teachers with requisite qualifications, and (iv)
round the clock availability of medical services.
Regulations for assessment of new and existing
New and Renewable Energy
homoeopathic colleges released
Rutvik Upadhyaya (rutvik@prsindia.org) Pratinav Damani (pratinav@prsindia.org)
The National Commission for Homoeopathy released Guidelines issued for schemes under the
the National Commission for Homoeopathy National Green Hydrogen Mission
(Assessment and Rating of Medical Institutions)
The Ministry of New and Renewable Energy has issued
Regulations, 2024.60 These Regulations have been
guidelines for various schemes under the National
notified under the National Commission for
Green Hydrogen Mission.64 The National Green
Homoeopathy Act, 2020 and replace the Homoeopathy
Hydrogen Mission was launched in January 2023 to
Central Council (Inspectors and Visitors) Regulations,
boost the production and development of green
1982.61,62 The Act sets up the National Commission for
hydrogen. Schemes under the Mission include: (i)
Homoeopathy to regulate education and practice of
research and development (R&D), (ii) incentives for
homoeopathy. The Regulations provide a process for
electrolyser manufacturing (a device to convert water
assessing new and existing homoeopathic medical
into hydrogen and oxygen), (iii) skill development, and
colleges in their compliance with minimum standards
(iv) setting up of hydrogen hubs.65,66,67,68 Key features
of education and infrastructure. This assessment will
of the guidelines include:
be done by the Medical Assessment and Rating Board
for Homoeopathy. Key features of the 2024  R&D scheme: Financial support (for the cost of
regulations include: the project) will be provided for R&D in areas
such as hydrogen production, storage, testing, and
 Process of assessment: All eligible homoeopathic
transportation. Entities eligible to receive support
medical institutions must undergo assessment five
include academic institutions, R&D institutions,
years after establishment and every year thereafter.
and government institutions/public sector
Along with the application, they must submit a fee
undertakings. Projects will be divided into short
to the Medical Assessment and Rating Board that
term (up to five years), mid-term (up to eight
ranges from Rs 25,000 to five lakh rupees,
years), and long term (up to 15 years), depending
depending upon the purpose of assessment and
on existing capabilities. The scheme will have a
level of education being assessed. Based on the
budgetary outlay of Rs 400 crore till 2025-26.
assessment, institutions will be rated. Rating
should be based on criteria such as: (i)  Electrolyser manufacturing: The scheme
infrastructure, (ii) human and financial resources, provides financial incentives to support domestic
(iii) teaching pedagogy and (iv) staff and student manufacturing of electrolysers. The scheme will
welfare. Standards for the same are notified in have a total outlay of Rs 4,440 crore, and provide
specific regulations for the same.63 Failure to an incentive per kilowatt of manufacturing
comply with standards may lead to the Board: (i) capacity. Companies must have a net worth of one
reducing the intake of seats, (ii) denying further crore rupees per megawatt of manufacturing
admissions, or (iii) recommending de-recognition capacity to be eligible. Smaller manufacturers
of the college. (with a net worth of Rs 30 lakh per megawatt or
higher) are also eligible under a separate tranche of
 Existing institutions that have been established for
the scheme.
over five years and have received approval during
previous three years can get an extension. The  Setting up hydrogen hubs: Regions that can
extension will be for another year of admissions support large scale production/ utilisation of
based on self-declaration. hydrogen will be identified and developed as
hydrogen hubs. Support will be provided for core
 Inspection: For assigning ratings, institutions will
infrastructure such as storage and transportation
be assessed via inspections. Inspections will be
and water treatment facilities. The scheme has an
carried out by inspectors or independent rating
outlay of Rs 200 crore till 2025-26.
agencies. Inspectors must possess a recognised
post-graduate degree in homoeopathy and at least  Skill development: This scheme seeks to carry
five years of professional experience with the out skilling, and design curricula for schools and
government or an autonomous body. Inspections higher educational institutions. Individuals aged
can be conducted in a physical, online, or hybrid between 18-45 years, who fulfil the required job
mode. Ratings must be published annually on the criteria, will be eligible for training. Training
website of the National Commission for institutes include higher education institutions, PM
- 12-
Monthly Policy Review – March 2024 PRS Legislative Research
Kaushal Kendras, and industrial enterprises. The developing local infrastructure (up to Rs 10 lakh
outlay for the scheme is Rs 35 crore until 2029-30. per megawatt of installed capacity).
Power Road Transport and Highways
Tanvi Vipra (tanvi@prsindia.org) Tanvi Vipra (tanvi@prsindia.org)
Tariff regulations for generation and Vehicle scrapping rules amended
transmission notified
The Ministry of Road Transport and Highways notified
The Central Electricity Regulatory Commission amendments to the Central Motor Vehicles
(CERC) notified the CERC (Terms and Conditions of (Registration and Functions of Vehicle Scrapping
Tariff) Regulations, 2024.69 These Regulations have Facility) Rules, 2021.72,73 The Rules have been made
been notified under the Electricity Act, 2003, which under the Motor Vehicles Act, 1988.74 The Act
regulates generation, transmission, and distribution of provides for registration of motor vehicles. The Rules
power.70 The 2024 Regulations will apply to tariff provide for scrapping end of life vehicles. Key features
determination by CERC in cases of: (i) purchase of of the Amendments are:
power from central public sector generators and other
 Obtaining consent to establish: Vehicle
generators operating in more than one state, and (ii) use
scrapping facilities must obtain consent before
of inter-state transmission systems. The 2024
establishing a facility. The Amendments change
Regulations will be applicable from April 2024 to
the authority that will provide this consent from
March 2029. Several aspects in the 2024 Regulations
the Transport Commissioner of a state/UT
are similar to the 2019 Regulations, which were
government, to the Pollution Control Board of the
applicable between April 2019 and March 2024.71 Key
state/UT. Under the Rules, a facility could be
features of the 2024 Regulations are as follows:
established even if an application has been made
 Rate of return: The CERC sets a tariff structure for obtaining consent. The Amendments remove
that provides for a fixed rate of return on this provision.
investments besides recovering all other costs
 Obtaining consent to operate: Under the Rules,
incurred. For changes in the rate of return, see
scrapping facilities must obtain a consent to
Table 4.
operate from the State/UT Pollution Control Board
Table 4: Rate of return on investments within six months of beginning operations. The
Amendments provides that scrapping facilities
Projects
must apply for a consent to operate at least 60 days
Existing commissioned
Project category Projects on or after April before beginning operations.
1, 2024
 Transfer of registration: Under the 2021 Rules,
Transmission 15.5% 15.0% the registration of scrapping facilities is non-
Thermal power 15.5% 15.5% transferable. The Amendments allow the transfer
of registration.
Hydro power 15.5% 15.5%
Storage-type hydro  Certificate of deposit: The scrapping facility
power including pump 16.5% 17.0% issues a Certificate of Deposit to a vehicle owner.
storage systems The certificate acknowledges the transfer of
Sources: CERC; PRS. ownership of the vehicle. The certificate is
mandatory for vehicle owners to avail incentives
 Capital costs: Power tariff has two parts, fixed
and benefits while purchasing a new vehicle. It is
and variable. Fixed costs include return on
electronically tradeable. The Amendments extends
investment, depreciation, and interest on capital.
the validity of the certificate from two years to
Capital costs for a project include any capital cost
three years. Certificates issued to government
approved by CERC, including capital expenditure
owned vehicles or impounded vehicles will not
on account of modernisation. The Regulations add
have any incentives. Certificates issued to such
that capital costs for existing thermal power
vehicles will also not be electronically tradeable.
projects will also include expenditure on account
of biomass handling equipment, and any changes
Rules for automated testing stations amended
in law. For new projects, these costs were already
included under the 2019 Regulations, and the 2024 The Ministry of Road Transport and Highway notified
Regulations maintain that. For hydro projects, amendments to the Central Motor Vehicles Rules,
capital costs will also include spending towards 1989.75,76 The Rules have been framed under the
Motor Vehicles Act, 1988.74 The Act empowers the
- 13-
Monthly Policy Review – March 2024 PRS Legislative Research
central government to recognise and regulate be divided into two parts: (i) Rs 9,737 crore for
automated testing stations. These stations conduct incentives to eligible units and (ii) Rs 300 crore for
fitness tests on transport vehicles. Key features of the implementation and institutional arrangements.
amendments include:
Incentives that will be provided under the scheme
 Registration certificates for operators to be include: (i) capital investment incentive for new and
transferable: Under the Rules, automated testing expanding units, (ii) interest subvention for new and
stations required a registration certificate to expanding units, and (iii) incentives linked to
commence operations. The certificate was non- manufacturing for new units. The following
transferable. The amendments allow the transfer committees will be constituted to oversee the
of the certificate between operators after six implementation: (i) a Steering Committee, that will
months from the date of its issuance. decide any interpretation of the scheme and issue
guidelines for implementation, (ii) a State Level
 Eligibility of owners to open testing stations:
Committee, that will monitor the implementation, and
Under the Rules, owners or operators of automated
(iii) a Secretary Level Committee, that will be
testing stations were required to have a net worth
responsible for its implementation.
of at least three crore rupees. The amendments
remove this requirement.
India signs trade agreement with European
 Re-testing for vehicles: Under the earlier Rules, Free Trade Association
if a vehicle failed the fitness test, the owner could
India signed a trade and economic partnership
apply for a retest within 30 days from the initial
agreement with the European Free Trade Association
test. The amendments extend the window to 180
(EFTA).78 The EFTA comprises Switzerland, Iceland,
days, also allowing multiple re-tests.
Norway, and Liechtenstein. Under the agreement,
 Removal of appellate authority to appeal EFTA would aim to increase foreign direct investment
against test results: The Rules provide for an in India by USD 100 billion in the next 15 years. India
appellate authority to address grievances arising will have market access covering all non-agricultural
from test results. The authority consists of an products and tariff concession on processed agricultural
officer, who must be at least at a Regional products in the EFTA. India will provide tariff
Transport Officer level. The amendments remove concessions on goods such as certain items of iron and
the provision for appellate authority. It instead steel, garments, and building machinery.
provides for the Regional Transport Officer to
ensure efficient operations of the station and the
integrity of test results.
 Application to light motor vehicle: The Rules
Telecommunications
provided for testing of light, medium and heavy
commercial vehicles. The amendments expand the Pratinav Damani (pratinav@prsindia.org)
scope to include light motor vehicles.
TRAI releases recommendations on usage of
 Testing stations to not conduct vehicle
scrapping: Automated testing stations can only embedded-SIMs
conduct vehicle fitness tests. They are prohibited
The Telecom Regulatory Authority of India (TRAI)
from providing services related to repair,
released its recommendations on the usage of
manufacture, or sale. The amendments add that
embedded SIM (eSIM) for machine-to machine
these stations will also be prohibited from
communication.79 Machine to machine communication
providing any vehicle scrapping services.
refers to technologies that allows devices to
communicate with other devices. An eSIM is
analogous to a physical SIM card; however, it is
embedded directly into a device and can be
reprogrammed to support different service providers.
Commerce
Recommendations include:
Tushar Chakrabarty (tushar@prsindia.org)
 Management of eSIMs: eSIMs can support
multiple profiles; however, only one profile can be
Cabinet approves Uttar Poorva
used at a time. A profile is the configuration data
Transformation Industrialisation Scheme
that allows the eSIM to connect to a mobile
network. A part of the network architecture
The Union Cabinet approved the Uttar Poorva
controls the loading, enabling, disabling and
Transformative Industrialisation Scheme (UNNATI),
2024.77 The central sector scheme will be implemented deletion of profiles on an eSIM based device. This
is called the Subscription Manager – Secure
over a 10-year period with a total cost of Rs 10,037
Routing (SM-SR). Currently, only Telecom
crore. The scheme aims to develop industries and
Service Providers (TSPs) can manage SM-SRs.
generate employment in the north-eastern states. It will
- 14-
Monthly Policy Review – March 2024 PRS Legislative Research
TRAI has recommended that other entities also be the central government in consultation with the
allowed to manage SM-SRs. These include Chief Controller of Explosives. To import
entities with: (i) access service and machine to petroleum, the licencee will have to declare the
machine authorisations under unified licence, and import of petroleum prior to its import to the
(ii) registration as Machine to Machine Service officer in charge of the airport and to the
Providers (who will require specific permission). Commissioner of Customs. Persons seeking the
Such providers include: supply chain management, permission to import petroleum by air must furnish
fleet management, and agriculture automation. certain information. This includes: (i) an import
declaration, (ii) a copy of their licence, and (iii) a
 Device to device transfer of eSIMs: There is
landing permit by the Director General of Civil
currently no method to transfer an eSIM from one
Aviation. The permission of the Commissioner of
device to another. In contrast, a physical SIM can
Customs will be required to unload the petroleum.
be removed from one device and simply put into
another. Hence, TRAI recommended that the
Department of Telecommunications examine the
possibility of developing such a standard.
Mines
 Reconfiguring international eSIMs: TRAI had
previously recommended that foreign eSIMs must
Pratinav Damani (pratinav@prsindia.org)
be allowed roaming on Indian networks for a
specified period. This period is three years, or on
Comments invited on the Offshore Areas
the change of the ownership of device, whichever
Operating Right Rules
is earlier. After this, the device must be
reconfigured with an Indian service provider’s The Ministry of Mines invited comments on the draft
eSIM. TRAI has recommended reducing this Offshore Areas Operating Rules, 2024.83 The draft
threshold to six months, or on change of Rules have been issued under the Offshore Areas
ownership, whichever is earlier. Mineral (Development and Regulation) Act, 2002.84
The Act regulates mining in the maritime zones of
India. The draft Rules seek to give to effect provisions
of the 2023 amendments to the Act.85 Operating rights
may be granted to private companies and government
Petroleum
companies. They may be granted as a composite
licence (a combined licence for exploration and
Pratinav Damani (pratinav@prsindia.org)
production) or a production lease. Key features of the
draft Rules include:
Rules amended to regulate the import of
petroleum and ISO containers by air  Consultation before offering concessions:
Before making available offshore areas for grant of
The Ministry of Petroleum and Natural Gas notified the
operating rights, the administering authority must
Petroleum (Amendment) Rules, 2024.80 The Rules
consult with several ministries on such grant. The
amend the Petroleum Rules, 2002.81 The Rules have
administering authority will be notified by the
been made under the Petroleum Act, 1934, which
central government. These include the: (i)
regulates the import, transport, storage, refinement and
Ministry of Defence, (ii) Ministry of Environment,
blending of petroleum.82 The amended Rules restrict
Forests and Climate Change, (iii) Ministry of
the import of petroleum by air and the import of ISO
Home Affairs, (iv) Ministry of External Affairs,
tank containers. ISO tank containers are a type of
and (v) Department of Atomic Energy.
petroleum freight container used for the transport of
liquified petroleum. Key features of the Rules include:  Conditions for operating rights: A production
lease will be valid for a period of 50 years.
 Restriction on the import of ISO tank
Holders of the operating rights must fulfil certain
containers: The amended Rules prohibit the
obligations. These include: (i) making efforts to
import of such containers unless permission has
rehabilitate the natural seabed, (ii) mining the
been obtained from the Controller or Chief
specified quantity of minerals, and (iii) allowing
Controller of Explosives. Persons seeking such
authorised officers to board vessels or structures
permission must furnish certain information. This
when required.
includes: (i) a valid licence, and (ii)
manufacturer’s inspection and documents detailing  Lapse, surrender or termination of licence:
the design of the container. However, these rules Composite licences and production leases can
do not apply to ISO containers that contain lapse, be surrendered, or be terminated. If the
petroleum imported for research and development. licensee/ lessee fails to undertake exploration
within a year or production within two years, their
 Restriction on the import of petroleum by air:
licence/lease can lapse. Licensees and lessees can
The amended Rules restrict the import of
also surrender their operating rights. The surrender
petroleum by air, except to airports authorised by
- 15-
Monthly Policy Review – March 2024 PRS Legislative Research
of licence can be refused by the administering sector. Thus, the Committee recommended that
authority. The central government has the power more coking coal should be supplied to the steel
to terminate operating rights after consultation sector. The Committee also recommended that
with the administering authority. Grounds could the washing capacity be increased. Washing refers
include: (i) public interest, (ii) strategic interest of to removing impurities (such as sulphur and ash)
the country, (iii) preservation of the environment, from coal. It also recommended that coal
and (iv) violation of terms and conditions of gasification be used for the production of direct
licence/lease. reduced iron (DRI). DRI contains lower amounts
of impurities and is preferred for steelmaking.
Comments are invited until April 10, 2024.
Coal gasification converts carbon into syngas
(mostly carbon monoxide and hydrogen), and can
be used to produce DRI.
 Reduction of non-coking coal imports: Non-
Coal
coking coal is used in the production of power.
The Committee observed that boilers could use
Pratinav Damani (pratinav@prsindia.org)
domestic coal for power production. Imported coal
is subject to price fluctuations; however, the price
Inter-Ministerial Committee releases report on
of power produced cannot be escalated
coal import substitution
proportionally. Thus, the Committee
An Inter-Ministerial Committee constituted by the recommended that boilers use domestic coal and
Ministry of Coal released a report on coal import be retrofitted to make them compatible with
substitution.86 In 2023, India produced 893 million domestic coal.
tonnes (MT) of coal, of which 833 MT is non-coking
 GST compensation cess on coal: The Committee
coal (used in power). India also imported 237 MT of
recommended rationalising GST compensation
coal in 2023. Coal is largely used for power generation
cess on coal. Cess is levied at a flat rate of Rs 400
(64%), steel production (8%) and cement production
per tonne. This is regardless of the origin
(5%). The demand for coal is projected to be 1.6
(domestic or imported), quality, or source. This
billion tonnes by 2030. Key observations and
leads to a higher cost for domestic coal per unit of
recommendations include:
energy, as domestic coal is generally inferior in
 Reduction of coking coal imports: Coking coal energy content as compared to imported coal.
is primarily used in the production of steel. The Hence, it recommended that the cess be charged as
steel industry fulfils 90% of its coking coal a percentage of the value of coal. This is expected
requirements through imports. In 2022-23, the to make domestic coal cheaper.
domestic production of coking coal was 56 MT,
out of which only 11 MT was supplied to steel
sector. The rest was mainly supplied to the power
1 Current Elections, Election Commission of India, 9 Citizenship Rules, 2009, Ministry of Home Affairs, February 25,
https://www.eci.gov.in/election-management. 2009, https://www.mha.gov.in/PDF_Other/Citi_Rule-2009.pdf.
2 Revised Schedule, Current Elections, Election Commission of 10 Citizenship Amendment Act, 2019,
India, https://www.eci.gov.in/eci- https://prsindia.org/files/bills_acts/bills_parliament/2019/Citizenship
backend/public/api/download?url=LMAhAK6sOPBp%2FNFF0iRfX %20(Amendment)%20Bill,%202019.pdf.
bEB1EVSLT41NNLRjYNJJP1KivrUxbfqkDatmHy12e%2FzBiU51z 11 S.O. 1231(E), Ministry of Home Affairs, March 11, 2024,
PFZI5qMtjV1qgjFsK5bO1Fe8raUy8r%2B3VvV90xGp1Km%2F8Iq https://egazette.gov.in/WriteReadData/2024/252848.pdf.
5yoAXpUIkspCSv%2B1yJkuMeCkTzY9fhBvw%3D%3D
12 Cinematograph (Certification) Rules, 2024, Ministry of
3 High Level Committee Report on Simultaneous Elections in India, Information and Broadcasting, March 15, 2024,
March 14, 2024, https://onoe.gov.in/report-web/Hlc-report-en.pdf. https://mib.gov.in/sites/default/files/Final%20Cinematograph%20Cer
4 Developments in India’s Balance of Payments during the Third tification%20Rules%2014032024-Accessible.pdf.
Quarter (October-December) of 2023-24, Reserve Bank of India, 13 The Cinematograph (Certification) Rules, 1983, Ministry of
March 26, 2024, Information and Broadcasting, May 9, 1983,
https://rbidocs.rbi.org.in/rdocs/PressRelease/PDFs/PR2116BOPBA74 https://upload.indiacode.nic.in/showfile?actid=AC_CEN_29_41_000
774CAC8142C39C136C429CC509BE.PDF. 11_195237_1517807328551&type=rule&filename=Cinematograph%
5 Article 105(1) and Article 194(2), The Indian Constitution. 20Certification%20Rules%201983.pdf.
6 Criminal Appeal No. 1207 of 1997, P.V. Narasimha Rao vs. State 14 The Cinematograph Act, 1952,
(CBI/SPE), April 17, 1998, https://www.indiacode.nic.in/bitstream/123456789/2170/5/a1952-
https://main.sci.gov.in/jonew/judis/13282.pdf. 37.pdf.
7 Criminal Appeal No. 451 of 2019, Sita Soren vs. Union of India, 15 The Cinematograph (Amendment) Act, 2023,
March 4, 2024, https://egazette.gov.in/WriteReadData/2023/247867.pdf.
https://main.sci.gov.in/supremecourt/2014/10177/10177_2014_1_150 16 Draft Cinematograph (Adjudication of Penalty) Rules, 2024,
1_51211_Judgement_04-Mar-2024.pdf. Ministry of Information and Broadcasting, March 15, 2024,
8 Citizenship (Amendment) Rules, 2024, Ministry of Home Affairs, https://mib.gov.in/sites/default/files/Notice%20dated%2015-03-
March 11, 2024, 2024%20-
https://egazette.gov.in/WriteReadData/2024/252847.pdf. %20Inviting%20Comments%20for%20Cinematograph%20%28Adju
dication%20of%20Penalty%29%20Rules%2C%202024.pdf.
- 16-
Monthly Policy Review – March 2024 PRS Legislative Research
35 Insurance Regulatory and Development Authority of India (Unit
Linked Insurance Products) Regulations, 2019,
17 The Cinematograph Act, 1952,
https://irdai.gov.in/document-detail?documentId=604874.
https://www.indiacode.nic.in/bitstream/123456789/2170/5/a1952-
37.pdf. 36 Insurance Regulatory and Development Authority of India
(Protection of Policyholders’ Interests, Operations and Allied Matters
18 Guidelines of Accessibility Standards in the Public Exhibition of
of Insurers) Regulations, 2024, Insurance Regulatory and
Feature Films in Cinema Theatres for Persons with Hearing and
Development Authority of India, March 20, 2024,
Visual Impairment, Ministry of Information and Broadcasting, March
https://egazette.gov.in/WriteReadData/2024/253330.pdf.
15, 2024,
https://mib.gov.in/sites/default/files/O.M.%20dated%2015.03.2024% 37 Insurance Regulatory and Development Authority of India
20regarding%20Guidelines%20of%20Accessibilty%20Standards.%2 (Protection of Policyholders’ Interests) Regulations, 2017, Insurance
0-%20Accessible.pdf. Regulatory and Development Authority of India, June 22, 2017,
https://irdai.gov.in/document-detail?documentId=385593.
19 The Rights of Persons With Disabilities Act, 2016,
https://www.indiacode.nic.in/bitstream/123456789/15939/1/the_right 38 Insurance Regulatory and Development Authority of India (Bima
s_of_persons_with_disabilities_act%2C_2016.pdf. Sugam - Insurance Electronic Marketplace) Regulations, 2024,
Insurance Regulatory and Development Authority of India, March
20 Report of the Committee on Digital Competition Law, Ministry of
20, 2024, https://egazette.gov.in/WriteReadData/2024/253321.pdf.
Corporate Affairs,
https://www.mca.gov.in/bin/dms/getdocument?mds=gzGtvSkE3zIVh 39 SEBI Board Meeting, Securities and Exchange Board of India,
AuBe2pbow%253D%253D&type=open. March 15, 2024, https://www.sebi.gov.in/media-and-
notifications/press-releases/mar-2024/sebi-board-
21 “MCA invites public comments on Report of Committee on Digital
meeting_82286.html.
Competition Law and Draft Bill on Digital Competition Law”, Press
Information Bureau, Ministry of Corporate Affairs, March 12, 2024, 40 SEBI (Foreign Portfolio Investors) (Second Amendment)
https://pib.gov.in/PressReleasePage.aspx?PRID=2013947. Regulations, 2023, Securities and Exchange Board of India, August
10, 2023, https://egazette.gov.in/WriteReadData/2023/248012.pdf.
22 No. CCI/Reg-C.R./2024, The Competition Commission of India,
March 6, 2024, https://www.cci.gov.in/images/whatsnew/en/gazette- 41 Securities and Exchange Board of India (Index Providers)
notification-published-on-06-march-2024-regarding-the-competition- Regulations, 2024, Securities and Exchange Board of India, March
commission-of-india-co1709739461.pdf. 11, 2024, https://www.sebi.gov.in/legal/regulations/mar-
2024/securities-and-exchange-board-of-india-index-providers-
23 No. CCI/Reg-S.R./2024, The Competition Commission of India,
regulations-2024_82144.html.
March 6, 2024, https://www.cci.gov.in/images/whatsnew/en/gazette-
notification-published-on-06-march-2024-regarding-the-competition- 42 Securities and Exchange Board of India (Real Estate Investment
commission-of-india-se1709738701.pdf. Trusts) (Amendment) Regulations, 2024, Securities and Exchange
Board of India, March 8, 2024,
24 The Competition Act, 2002,
https://www.sebi.gov.in/legal/regulations/mar-2024/securities-and-
https://www.indiacode.nic.in/bitstream/123456789/2010/3/A2003-
exchange-board-of-india-real-estate-investment-trusts-amendment-
12.pdf.
regulations-2024_82138.html.
25 The Competition (Amendment) Bill, 2023,
43 Securities and Exchange Board of India (Real Estate Investment
https://sansad.in/getFile/BillsTexts/LSBillTexts/PassedBothHouses/T
Trusts) Regulations 2014, Securities and Exchange Board of India,
he%20Competition419202351513PM.pdf?source=legislation.
https://www.sebi.gov.in/legal/regulations/feb-2023/securities-and-
26 S.O. 1130(E), Ministry of Corporate Affairs, March 7, 2024, exchange-board-of-india-real-estate-investment-trusts-regulations-
https://egazette.gov.in/WriteReadData/2024/252733.pdf. 2014-last-amended-on-february-14-2023-_68061.html.
27 “Ministry of Corporate Affairs revises threshold limits for value of 44 S.O. 1363(E), Ministry of Heavy Industries, March 15, 2024,
Assets and Turnover for purposes of combination filings under https://egazette.gov.in/WriteReadData/2024/253042.pdf.
Competition Act, 2002 as a step towards ‘Ease of doing Business’”,
45 S.O. 1334(E), Ministry of Heavy Industries, March 13, 2024,
Press Information Bureau, Ministry of Corporate Affairs, March 8,
https://egazette.gov.in/WriteReadData/2024/252967.pdf.
2024, https://pib.gov.in/PressReleasePage.aspx?PRID=2012821.
46 G.S.R. 201(E), Plastic Waste Management (Amendment) Rules,
28 Reserve Bank of India (Credit Card and Debit Card – Issuance and
2024, Ministry of Environment, Forest and Climate Change, March
Conduct) Directions, 2022, Reserve Bank of India, April 21, 2022,
14, 2024, https://egazette.gov.in/WriteReadData/2024/253031.pdf.
https://rbidocs.rbi.org.in/rdocs/notification/PDFs/92MDCREDITDE
BITCARDC423AFFB5E7945149C95CDD2F71E9158.PDF. 47 Plastic Waste Management Rules, 2016.
29 Amendment to the Master Direction - Credit Card and Debit Card 48 G.S.R. 190(E), Battery Waste Management (Amendment) Rules,
– Issuance and Conduct Directions, 2022, Reserve Bank of India, 2024, Ministry of Environment, Forest and Climate Change, March
March 7, 2024, 14, 2024, https://egazette.gov.in/WriteReadData/2024/252990.pdf.
https://rbidocs.rbi.org.in/rdocs/notification/PDFs/CIRCULARAMEN 49 S.O. 4669(E), Battery Waste Management (Amendment) Rules,
DMENTTOMDA5CCCE00D45C4B6E8990BCEEE5810A87.PDF. 2023, Ministry of Environment, Forest and Climate Change, October
30 Arrangements with Card Networks for issue of Credit Cards, 25, 2023, https://egazette.gov.in/WriteReadData/2023/249699.pdf.
Reserve Bank of India, March 6, 2024, 50 S.O. 3984(E), Battery Waste Management Rules, 2022, Ministry of
https://rbidocs.rbi.org.in/rdocs/notification/PDFs/FINALCIRCULAR Environment, Forest and Climate Change, August 22, 2022,
DPSSC622292228054F9BB686657192C0D8F9.PDF. https://cpcb.nic.in/uploads/hwmd/Battery-WasteManagementRules-
31 Omnibus Framework for recognition of Self-Regulatory 2022.pdf.
Organisations for Regulated Entities of the Reserve Bank, Reserve 51 ‘Uniform Code for Pharmaceutical Marketing Practices’,
Bank of India, March 21, 2024, Department of Pharmaceuticals, March 12, 20024,
https://www.rbi.org.in/Scripts/BS_PressReleaseDisplay.aspx?prid=5 https://pharmaceuticals.gov.in/sites/default/files/UCPMP%202024%
7534. 20for%20website_0.pdf
32 Insurance Regulatory and Development Authority of India 52 “Department of Pharmaceuticals announces the Revamped
(Insurance Products) Regulations, 2024, Insurance Regulatory and Pharmaceuticals Technology Upgradation Assistance Scheme”,
Development Authority of India, March 20, 2024, Ministry of Chemicals and Fertilizers, Press Information Bureau,
https://egazette.gov.in/WriteReadData/2024/253325.pdf. March 11, 2024,
33 Insurance Regulatory and Development Authority of India (Micro https://www.pib.gov.in/PressReleasePage.aspx?PRID=2013379.
Insurance) Regulations, 2015, https://irdai.gov.in/document- 53 Pharmaceutical Technology Upgradation Assistance Scheme,
detail?documentId=617801. Department of Pharmaceuticals,
34 Insurance Regulatory and Development Authority of India (Health https://pharmaceuticals.gov.in/sites/default/files/Pharmaceutical%20
Insurance) Regulations, 2016, https://irdai.gov.in/document- Technology%20Upgradation%20Assistance%20Scheme%20%28PT
detail?documentId=602887. UAS%29_0_0.pdf.
- 17-
Monthly Policy Review – March 2024 PRS Legislative Research
70 The Electricity Act, 2003,
https://www.indiacode.nic.in/bitstream/123456789/2058/1/A2003-
54 CG-DL-E-01062020-219680, Ministry of Micro Small and
36.pdf.
Medium Enterprises, June 1, 2020,
https://msme.gov.in/sites/default/files/MSME_gazette_of_india.pdf. 71 Central Electricity Regulatory Commission (Terms and Conditions
of Tariff) Regulations, 2019, Central Electricity Regulatory
55 Constitution of a Committee for Reforms in the Pricing Framework
Commission, March 7, 2019,
for Drugs and Medical Devices, Department of Pharmaceuticals,
https://cercind.gov.in/2019/regulation/Tariff%20Regulations-
March 12, 2024,
2019.pdf.
https://pharmaceuticals.gov.in/sites/default/files/Reforms%20in%20t
he%20Pricing%20Framework_0.pdf 72 G.S.R 212 (E), Motor Vehicles (Registration and Function s of
Vehicle Scrapping Facility) Amendment Rules, 2024, Ministry of
56 ‘Establishment of New Homoeopathic Medical Institution
Road Transport and Highways, March 15, 2024,
(Opening of New or Higher Course of Study or Training and Increase
https://egazette.gov.in/WriteReadData/2024/253120.pdf.
of Intake Capacity by a Medical Institution), Regulations, 2024’,
National Commission for Homoeopathy, March 12, 2024, 73 Motor Vehicles (Registration and Functions of Vehicle Scrapping
https://nch.org.in/upload/MSR-New-College.pdf Facility) Rules, 2021, https://morth.nic.in/gsr-653e-regarding-motor-
vehicles-registration-and-functions-vehicle-scrapping-facility-rules-
57 National Commission for Homoeopathy Act, 2020,
2021.
https://www.indiacode.nic.in/bitstream/123456789/15621/1/A2020-
15.pdf 74 The Motor Vehicles Act, 1988,
https://www.indiacode.nic.in/bitstream/123456789/9460/1/a1988-
58 Establishment of New Medical College, (Opening of New or
59.pdf.
Higher Course of Study or Training and Increase of Admissions
Capacity by a Medical College) Regulations, 2011, 75 G.S.R. 195 (E), Central Motor Vehicles (Seventh Amendment)
https://upload.indiacode.nic.in/showfile?actid=AC_CEN_23_62_000 Rules, 2024, Ministry of Road Transport and Highways, March 14,
02_197359_1517807322021&type=regulation&filename=Establishm 2024, https://egazette.gov.in/WriteReadData/2024/253055.pdf.
ent%20of%20new%20colleges%20regulations.pdf 76 Central Motor Vehicles Rules, 1989, https://morth.nic.in/central-
59 The National Commission for Homoeopathy (Minimum Essential motor-vehicles-rules-1989-1.
Standards for Homoeopathic Colleges and Attached Hospitals) 77 “Cabinet approves Uttar Poorva Transformative Industrialization
Regulations, 2024. National Commission for Homoeopathy, March Scheme, 2024”, Press Information Bureau, Ministry of Commerce
11, 2024, https://nch.org.in/upload/MES-regulaiton-final.pdf and Industry, March 7, 2024,
60 National Commission for Homoeopathy (Assessment and Rating of https://pib.gov.in/PressReleasePage.aspx?PRID=2012362.
Medical Institutions)Regulations, 2024, March 12, 2024, 78 “India-EFTA Trade and Economic Partnership Agreement”, Press
https://nch.org.in/upload/Assessment-and-Rating-of-Medical- Information Bureau, Ministry of Commerce and Industry, March 10,
Institutions.pdf 2024, https://pib.gov.in/PressReleasePage.aspx?PRID=2013169.
61 Homoeopathy Central Council (Inspectors and Visitors) 79 Recommendations on Usage of Embedded SIM for Machine-to-
Regulation, 1982, Machine (M2M) Communications, TRAI, March 21, 2024,
https://nch.org.in/upload/Inspector_and_Visitor_1983.pdf https://www.trai.gov.in/sites/default/files/Recommendations_210320
62 National Commission for Homoeopathy Act, 2020, 24_0.pdf.
https://www.indiacode.nic.in/bitstream/123456789/15621/1/A2020- 80 G.S.R 154 (E), Ministry of Petroleum and Natural Gas, March 4,
15.pdf. 2024, https://egazette.gov.in/WriteReadData/2024/252609.pdf.
63 The National Commission for Homoeopathy (Minimum Essential 81 G.S.R 204 (E), Ministry of Petroleum and Natural Gas, March 13,
Standards for Homoeopathic Colleges and Attached Hospitals) 2002,
Regulations, 2024. National Commission for Homoeopathy, March https://mopng.gov.in/files/TableManagements/Rules2002_0.pdf.
11, 2024, https://nch.org.in/upload/MES-regulaiton-final.pdf 82 The Petroleum Act, 1934,
64 “Cabinet approves National Green Hydrogen Mission”, PIB, https://www.indiacode.nic.in/bitstream/123456789/2401/1/A1934-
January 4, 2023, 30.pdf.
https://pib.gov.in/PressReleasePage.aspx?PRID=1888547. 83 Draft Offshore Areas Operating Rights Rules, 2024, Ministry of
65 Guidelines for implementation of R&D Scheme under the National Mines, March 10, 2024,
Green Hydrogen Mission, Ministry of New and Renewable Energy, https://mines.gov.in/admin/storage/app/uploads/65eea7f9621cc17101
March 15, 2024, 39385.pdf.
https://cdnbbsr.s3waas.gov.in/s3716e1b8c6cd17b771da77391355749 84 The Offshore Areas Mineral (Development and Regulation) Act,
f3/uploads/2024/03/20240316152774043.pdf. 2002,
66 Scheme Guidelines for implementation of “Strategic Interventions https://www.indiacode.nic.in/bitstream/123456789/2040/3/A2003-
for Green Hydrogen Transitions (SIGHT) Programme – Component 17.pdf.
I: Incentive Scheme for Electrolyser Manufacturing Tranche – II” 85 The Offshore Areas Mineral (Development and Regulation)
under the National Green Hydrogen Mission , Ministry of New and Amendment Act, 2023,
Renewable Energy, March 16, 2024, https://egazette.gov.in/WriteReadData/2023/248041.pdf.
https://cdnbbsr.s3waas.gov.in/s3716e1b8c6cd17b771da77391355749 86 Strategy Paper on Coal Import Substitution, Inter Ministerial
f3/uploads/2024/03/20240316314427038.pdf.
Committee Report, Ministry of Coal, March 7, 2024,
67 Guidelines for scheme on skilling, up-skilling and re-skilling under https://coal.gov.in/sites/default/files/2024-03/07-03-2024a-wn.pdf.
the National Green Hydrogen Mission, Ministry of New and
Renewable Energy, March 16, 2024,
DISCLAIMER: This document is being furnished to you for your
https://cdnbbsr.s3waas.gov.in/s3716e1b8c6cd17b771da77391355749
information. You may choose to reproduce or redistribute this
f3/uploads/2024/03/202403161721417787.pdf.
report for non-commercial purposes in part or in full to any other
68 Scheme Guidelines for setting up Hydrogen Hubs in India under
person with due acknowledgement of PRS Legislative Research
the National Green Hydrogen Mission, Ministry of New and
(“PRS”). The opinions expressed herein are entirely those of the
Renewable Energy, March 15, 2024,
author(s). PRS makes every effort to use reliable and
https://cdnbbsr.s3waas.gov.in/s3716e1b8c6cd17b771da77391355749
comprehensive information, but PRS does not represent that the
f3/uploads/2024/03/20240316695795641.pdf.
contents of the report are accurate or complete. PRS is an
69 Central Electricity Regulatory Commission (Terms and Conditions independent, not-for-profit group. This document has been
of Tariff) Regulations, 2024, Central Electricity Regulatory prepared without regard to the objectives or opinions of those
Commission, March 15, 2024, who may receive it.
https://cercind.gov.in/regulations/notification-2024.pdf.
- 18-
