Monthly Policy Review
March 2026
Highlights of this Issue
Budget Session 2026 reconvenes after recess (p. 2)
The second half of the Session resumed on March 9, 2026, and is scheduled to conclude on April 2, 2026. Five
Bills have been introduced in the second half of the Session, and one Bill has been passed.
Current account deficit at 1.3% of GDP in the third quarter of 2025-26 (p. 2)
India recorded a current account deficit of USD 13.2 billion in the third quarter of 2025-26. Capital account
registered a net outflow of USD 10 billion, and foreign exchange reserves decreased by USD 24.4 billion.
The Transgender Persons (Protection of Rights) Amendment Bill, 2026 passed (p. 2)
The Bill makes changes to the definition of a transgender person, creates an authority to aid the District
Magistrate in issuing transgender identity certificates and adds new offences and penalties to the 2019 Act.
Supreme Court rules maternity leave entitlement regardless of adopted child’s age (p. 3)
The Court held that the provision restricting maternity leave to 12 weeks for women adopting children below the
age of three months violates Article 14, as it operates unequally for adoptive mothers.
Supreme Court clarifies that Scheduled Caste status limited to certain religions (p. 3)
The Court upheld that only persons professing Hinduism, Sikhism, or Buddhism are recognised as members of
Scheduled Caste communities. Conversion to any other religion will lead to loss of such status.
The Jan Vishwas Bill, 2026 introduced in Lok Sabha (p. 4)
The Bill seeks to amend 80 central Acts to decriminalise or rationalise offences and penalties.
Foreign Contribution (Regulation) Amendment Bill, 2026 introduced (p. 4)
If the FCRA certificate of an organisation is cancelled or not renewed, the assets created out of foreign
contribution will rest in a government designated authority.
FDI restrictions amended for countries sharing a land border (LBCs) with India (p. 5)
The revised guidelines define a beneficial owner of a company as a person holding more than 10% of its shares,
capital or profits, as defined under the Prevention of Money-Laundering Rules, 2005.
The Digital Trade Facilitation Bill, 2026 draft released (p. 5)
The Draft seeks to provide legal recognition to electronic trade documents and identity management and trust
service providers.
The CAPFs (General Administration) Bill, 2026 introduced in Rajya Sabha (p. 6)
The Bill specifies that a certain proportion of each senior level will be filled by deputation from the Indian Police
Service. This includes all positions at the director general level.
Corporate Laws (Amendment) Bill, 2026 introduced in Lok Sabha (p. 6)
The Bill seeks to amend the Companies Act, 2013 and the Limited Liability Partnership Act, 2008. The Bill has
been referred to a Joint Parliamentary Committee.
Ministry of Civil Aviation issue new directions regarding passenger facilitation (p. 8)
These include measures such as allocating 60% of seats on any flight free of charge and policy clarification around
passenger details such as delays, cancellation, and carriage of sports or musical equipment, and pets.
Standing Committees submitted reports on various subjects
Subjects include cyber crime and safety of women, production of oilseeds and pulses, water efficient seeds, the
functioning of AIIMS, New Delhi, and the impact of AI.
April 1, 2026
PRS Legislative Research ■ Institute for Policy Research Studies
3rd Floor, Gandharva Mahavidyalaya ■ 212, Deen Dayal Upadhyaya Marg ■ New Delhi – 110002
Tel: (011) 2323 4801, 4343 4035 ■ www.prsindia.org
Monthly Policy Review – March 2026 PRS Legislative Research
Parliament Industrial production grew by 5.3% in the
third quarter of 2025-26
Ruchira Sakalle (ruchira@prsindia.org)
The Index of Industrial Production (IIP) grew by 5.3%
Budget Session 2026 resumes after recess
in the third quarter (October-December) of 2025-26,
higher than the same period in 2024-25 (an increase of
The Budget Session of Parliament commenced on
4.1%).2,3 Note that manufacturing (78%) has the
February 1, 2026. After a recess from February 14 to
highest weightage in the calculation of the IIP,
March 8, Parliament resumed on March 9, 2026.
followed by mining (14%) and electricity (8%).
Five Bills have been introduced in the second half of
Manufacturing increased by 6.3% in the third quarter of
the Budget Session so far. These are: (i) the
2025-26. Mining registered an increase of 4.1%.
Transgender Persons (Protection of Rights)
However, Electricity registered a decrease of 0.9%. In
Amendment Bill, 2026; (ii) the Corporate Laws
the third quarter of 2024-25, electricity had increased
(Amendment) Bill, 2026; (iii) the Central Armed Police
by 4.1%.
Forces (Amendment) Bill, 2026; (iv) the Jan Vishwas
Bill, 2026; and (v) the Foreign Contribution
Figure 2: Growth in IIP, Q3 2025-26
(Regulation) Bill, 2026. The Transgender Persons (%, year-on-year)
(Protection of Rights) Amendment Bill, 2026 was
10%
passed by Parliament. The Corporate Laws
(Amendment) Bill, 2026 has been referred to a Joint 8% 6.3%
Parliamentary Committee. 6% 5.3%
3.8%
The Union Budget was discussed after the recess. The 4%
Demands for Grants of the Ministry of Railways and 2%
the Ministry of Agriculture and Farmers Welfare were
0%
discussed. The Finance Bill, 2026, and two
Appropriation Bills were introduced and passed during -2% -0.9%
this period. -4%
-6%
-8%
IIP Mining Mfg Electricity
Macroeconomic Development
Oct-25 Nov-25 Dec-25 Oct-Dec 25
Shrusti Singh (shrusti@prsindia.org)
Sources: MoSPI; PRS.
Current account deficit at 1.3% of GDP in the
third quarter of 2025-26
India recorded a current account deficit of USD 13.2
Social Justice
billion (1.3% of GDP) in the third quarter (Oct-Dec) of
2025-26, higher than the corresponding quarter last
Navya Sriram (navya@prsindia.org)
year (USD 11.3 billion or 1.1% of GDP).1 In the
second quarter (July-Sep) of 2025-26, India recorded a The Transgender Persons (Protection of
current account deficit of USD 14.1 billion (1.5% of Rights) Amendment Bill, 2026 passed
GDP). Capital account registered a net outflow of USD
The Transgender Persons (Protection of Rights)
10 billion, and foreign exchange reserves decreased by
Amendment Bill, 2026 was introduced in Lok Sabha on
USD 24.4 billion in the third quarter of 2025-26.
March 13, 2026 by the Minister of Social Justice and
Table 1: Balance of payments, Q3 2025-26 Empowerment, Dr Virendra Kumar.4 The Bill was
(USD billion) passed in Lok Sabha on March 24, 2026 and in Rajya
Q3 Q2 Q3 Sabha on March 25, 2026. The Bill amends the
Particular
2024-25 2025-26 2025-26 Transgender Persons (Protection of Rights) Act, 2019.5
a. Exports 109.8 109.0 111.7 The Act provides for rights of transgender persons and
b. Imports 189.1 198.1 205.3 their welfare. Some key features are:
c. Trade balance
-79.3 -89.1 -93.6  Definition of a transgender person: The 2019
(a-b)
Act defines a transgender person as a person whose
d. Net services 51.2 50.9 57.5
gender does not match with the gender assigned at
e. Other transfers 16.8 24.1 22.9 birth, and specifies certain persons who are
f. Current account (c+d+e) -11.3 -14.1 -13.2 included. The Bill removes this definition. The
g. Capital account -26.6 2.1 -10.0 Bill retains some categories of the Act: (i) a person
h. Errors and omissions 0.3 1.1 -1.2 with sociocultural identities such as kinner, hijra,
i. Change in reserves (f+g+h) -37.7 -10.9 -24.4 aravani, or jogta, and (ii) a person with variations
Sources: RBI; PRS at birth in characteristics such as primary sexual
characteristics, external genitalia, chromosomes, or
- 2 -
Monthly Policy Review – March 2026 PRS Legislative Research
hormones from the normative standard of male or unequally for adoptive mothers who are similarly
female body. The Bill also includes: (i) eunuch, situated, resulting in discrimination without reasonable
and (ii) a person who is forced to assume a justification. The Court also held that by stipulating an
transgender identity by mutilation, emasculation, age limit, the provision fails to recognise the right of
castration, surgical, chemical or hormonal reproductive autonomy of those adoptive mothers who
procedures. The Bill removes the following adopt a child aged three months or more. Hence, it
categories included in the Act: (i) a trans-man or violates Article 21 as it denies such adoptive mothers
trans-woman, irrespective of whether such a the ability to exercise their right to decisional
person has undergone sex reassignment surgery, autonomy, and bodily integrity under Article 21. The
hormone therapy, laser therapy, or such other Court stated that the provision should be read as any
therapy, and (ii) genderqueer. The Bill also states woman legally adopting a child would be entitled to 12
that it will not include or will never have included week maternity leave from the date the child is handed
persons with different sexual orientations and self- over to her.
perceived sexual identities.
Supreme Court upheld Scheduled Caste status
 Recognition of transgender identity: Under the limited to specified religions under 1950 Order
Act, a transgender person may apply to the District
The Supreme Court of India delivered its judgment on
Magistrate for issuing a certificate of identity as a
March 24, 2026, affirming the eligibility for Scheduled
transgender person. The Bill adds that the District
Caste (SC) status under the Constitution (Scheduled
Magistrate will issue the certificate after examining
Caste) Order, 1950.8,9 The Court upheld High Court
the recommendation of a designated medical
(2024) interpretation of Clause 3 of the Order stating
board. The board will be headed by a Chief
that only persons professing Hinduism, Sikhism, or
Medical Officer or a Deputy Chief Medical
Buddhism are recognised as members of SC
Officer. The District Magistrate may also take
communities. The Court also held that conversion to
assistance of other medical experts.
any other religion results in the loss of SC status. It
 Change in gender: The Act provides that a emphasised that the restriction under Clause 3 is
revised certificate of identity may be obtained absolute, and that no statutory benefit, protection, or
where a transgender person undergoes surgery to reservation available to SC can be extended to a person
change gender. The Bill mandates obtaining a who does not belong to the mentioned religion groups.
certificate, indicating change in gender. It adds
that the concerned medical institution must furnish Standing Committee submits report on Cyber
information regarding the gender change surgery to Crimes and Safety of Women
the District Magistrate. Such a person will not
The Committee on the Empowerment of Women
retain the rights and entitlements under the Act.
(Chairperson: Dr. D. Purandeswari) submitted its report
 Offences and Penalties: The Bill adds certain on ‘Cyber Crimes and Cyber Safety of Women’ on
offences. Kidnapping and causing grievous hurt or March 23, 2026.10 The Committee examined the rise in
severe injury to force a person to assume a cybercrimes targeting women and children, including
transgender identity will carry: (i) imprisonment cyberstalking, sextortion, deepfakes, and online
between 10 years and life and a minimum fine of harassment, alongside gaps in reporting, investigation
two lakh rupees if the victim is an adult, and (ii) capacity, and platform accountability. It noted that as
imprisonment for life and a fine of at least five per NCRB data, between 2017 and 2022, there has
lakh rupees if the victim is a child. Forcing a been a 239% increase in cybercrimes against women
person to present as a transgender person and and a multi-fold rise in cases involving children.
engage in begging, servitude or bonded labour will
It noted that despite multiple initiatives, challenges
be punishable with: (i) imprisonment between five
persist in terms of low awareness, under-reporting
and 10 years and a fine of at least one lakh rupees,
(especially in rural areas), delays in data access from
if the victim is an adult, and (ii) imprisonment
intermediaries, shortage of skilled personnel, and lack
between 10 and 14 years and a fine of at least three
of a comprehensive legal and institutional framework
lakh rupees if the victim is a child.
to address emerging threats such as AI-enabled crimes.
For a PRS analysis of the Bill, see here.
Key recommendations include: (i) strengthening
Supreme Court rules entitlement to maternity awareness and campaigns by integrating frontline
leave regardless of age of adopted child workers such as ASHAs, Anganwadi workers and
teachers trained as ‘Cyber Safety Ambassadors’, (ii)
The Supreme Court ruled that adoptive mothers are enhancing investigative capabilities by expanding
entitled to paid maternity leave of 12 weeks, cyber forensic labs, strengthening inter-state data
irrespective of the age of the child.6 The Code of exchange, and empowering dedicated units for crimes
Social Security, 2020 restricts maternity leave of 12 involving women, (iii) holding digital platforms such as
weeks to women adopting children below the age of social media platforms to higher accountability
three months.7 The Court held that this provision standards with shorter compliance timelines and stricter
violates Article 14 (right to equality) as its operates AI driven detection tools, (iv) introducing age
- 3 -
Monthly Policy Review – March 2026 PRS Legislative Research
appropriate regulations and usage limits on social  Revision of fines and penalties: The Bill also
media to safeguard children and adolescents from revises the monetary value of fines and penalties for
adverse psychological impact, and (v) creating a several offences and specifies an increase by 10%
victim-centric response system by integrating helplines, of the respective minimum amount every three
psychological counselling, legal assistance and faster years.
redressal mechanisms.
 Property tax and advertisement tax in New Delhi
The Committee also recommended that mandatory municipal area: The Bill amends the New Delhi
KYC-based verification be introduced across all social Municipal Council Act, 1994. The Act provides for
media, dating and gaming platforms to curb the menace the levy of property tax. The Bill specifies that
of fake profiles, impersonation and anonymous property tax will consist of a building tax and a
harassment. It also recommended creation of special vacant land tax. It establishes a Municipal
cyber units within police forces, supported by digital Valuation Committee to recommend base value for
forensic capability, to fast-track investigations in vacant lands and buildings, and manner of
offences against women. It recommended that the determining and revising property tax. It removes
government may initiate a time-bound examination provisions for advertisement tax.
formulating a comprehensive and gender-sensitive
 Improvement notices: Under the Legal Metrology
cybercrime legislation.
Act, 2009, offences such as using or selling non-
For a PRS Summary of the Report, see here. standard weights will attract an improvement notice
for the first instance (requiring rectification), with
subsequent offences punishable with a fine.
 Warnings on first and second offences: The Bill
Commerce and Industry
provides that certain offences will attract an
advisory for the first contravention and a warning
The Jan Vishwas Bill, 2026 introduced in Lok
for the second, instead of penalties. For example,
Sabha
under the Apprentices Act, 1961, offences such as
Vaishali Dhariwal (vaishali@prsindia.org) refusing to furnish information or requiring an
apprentice to work overtime will be dealt with
The Jan Vishwas (Amendment of Provisions) Bill,
through an advisory and warning for the first two
11
2026 was introduced in Lok Sabha. It seeks to
instances.
amend 80 central Acts to decriminalise or rationalise
offences and penalties. The Bill has been brought in For a PRS summary of the Bill, see here. For a PRS
place of the Jan Vishwas (Amendment of Provisions) summary of the Select Committee report, see here. For
Bill, 2025 introduced on August 18, 2025. The 2025 a PRS analysis of the 2025 Bill, see here.
Bill sought to amend 17 central Acts, and was referred
Foreign Contribution (Regulation) Amendment
to a Select Committee of Lok Sabha (Chair: Mr.
Bill, 2026 introduced in Lok Sabha
Tejasvi Surya). The Committee submitted its report on
March 13, 2026 and recommended further changes to Vedika Bhanote (vedika@prsindia.org)
the 17 Acts, and recommended amendments to 65 other
The Foreign Contribution (Regulation) Amendment
Acts. The Government accepted the recommendations
Bill, 2026 was introduced in Lok Sabha on March 25,
of the Select Committee. The 2025 Bill was withdrawn
12
2026. It amends the Foreign Contribution
and replaced by a new Bill. Key changes include:
(Regulation) Act, 2010. The Act regulates the
 Decriminalising offences: The Bill decriminalises acceptance and utilisation of foreign contribution.
several offences. For example, under the National Under the Act, certain persons must register with the
Highways Act, 1956, making a highway impassable central government for accepting foreign contribution.
or less safe is punishable with imprisonment up to The Bill replaces the existing framework on
five years, a fine, or both. The Bill imposes a civil management of foreign contribution and assets created
penalty between Rs 10 lakh and one crore rupees. out of foreign contribution. The Bill adds that in cases
of cancellation, surrender, or ceasing of registration
 Removal of imprisonment term: In some cases,
certificate, foreign contribution and assets will vest
the Bill removes the imprisonment for an offence.
provisionally in the Designated Authority notified by
Under the Electricity Act, 2003, non-compliance
the central government. The foreign contribution and
with an order or a direction is punishable with
assets will vest permanently in the Designated
imprisonment up to three months, a fine, or both.
Authority: (i) if the concerned person fails to obtain a
The Bill instead imposes only a fine, and increases
fresh registration or get the registration renewed or
the maximum amount of fine.
restored within a prescribed period, or (ii) where a
 Omission of offences: The Bill removes several person who was previously permitted to accept foreign
offences. These include offences such as: (i) giving contribution, ceases to exist or is rendered inoperative
false alarm of fire under the Delhi Police Act, 1978, or defunct.
(ii) failure to give information of births and deaths
For a PRS summary of the bill, see here.
under the Delhi Municipal Corporation Act, 1957.
- 4 -
Monthly Policy Review – March 2026 PRS Legislative Research
FDI restrictions amended for countries sharing cannot be rejected solely for being in electronic
a land border with India form. Electronic documents will be treated
equivalent to paper documents provided: (i) they
Vedika Bhanote (vedika@prsindia.org)
contain the required information in a
The FDI guidelines for investments from countries corresponding paper trade document, and (ii) a
sharing a land border (LBCs) with India were revised.13 reliable method is used to identify the document,
Under the Consolidated FDI Policy: (i) an entity of an retain its integrity, and provide a verifiable audit
LBC, or (ii) where a beneficial owner is situated in or is trail from document creation to its extinction.
a citizen of an LBC, must get government approval for
 Control and transfer: The draft Bill proposes
investing in India.14 A citizen of Pakistan or an entity
that control over an electronic document shall be
incorporated in Pakistan can only invest after getting
equivalent to possession of a paper document.
government approval, and cannot invest in certain
Further, transfer, endorsement or amendment of an
sectors such as defence, atomic energy, etc.
electronic trade document shall have the same
The revised guidelines remove the requirement of a effect as in the case of paper document. It also
beneficial owner being situated in an LBC. It also allows for the conversion of trade documents
defines beneficial ownership as defined under the between paper and electronic form, provided a
Prevention of Money-laundering Act, 2002, and reliable method is used and a statement about the
Prevention of Money-laundering (Maintenance of form conversion is included in the document in its
Records) Rules, 2005.
15,16
Under the 2005 Rules, one
new form.
of the definitions states that a beneficial owner of a  Identity management and trust services: The
company is a person with ownership of more than 10% draft Bill seeks to provide legal recognition to
of shares, capital or profits of the company. The identity management and trust service providers.
revised guidelines also add that beneficial ownership These entities facilitate digital identity verification,
will include instances where citizens or entities of such authentication, and provide services such as
countries can directly or indirectly: (i) exercise control managing electronic signatures. Obligations of
over the investor entity, or (ii) exercise ultimate service providers include: (i) maintaining
effective control over the investee entity in any manner. operational rules, (ii) ensuring service availability,
The revised guidelines add that investments that do not and (iii) providing means for subscribers to report
require government approval will be subject to security breaches. The service provider shall be
reporting requirements as specified by the Department liable for any loss caused to the subscriber due to
for Promotion of Industry and Internal Trade. These its failure to comply with its obligations.
requirements will be in addition to compliance with
 Cross-border recognition: An electronic trade
current sectoral caps, and entry routes.
document cannot be rejected solely for being
Cap on remission rates removed for exporters issued outside India. Foreign identity management
services will be accepted provided they have the
Vedika Bhanote (vedika@prsindia.org)
same or a higher level of reliability.
The central government removed the 50% cap on
India and Canada sign terms of reference
remission rates on export products that was introduced
in February 2026.17 The amendment restores the rates
Vedika Bhanote (vedika@prsindia.org)
and value caps previously notified under the Remission
India and Canada signed the terms of reference for
of Duties and Taxes on Exported Products Scheme.
India-Canada comprehensive economic partnership
The Scheme provides refunds on duties and taxes
agreement (CEPA).20 The terms of reference seek to
incurred during manufacturing and distribution that are
not reimbursed under any other mechanism.18 The serve as a guide for India-Canada CEPA negotiations.
The negotiations would cover trade in goods, services,
amendment seeks to support Indian exporters amid
and other mutually agreed policy areas. India’s trade
disruption in West Asia.
with Canada stood at $8.7 billion in 2024-25, of which
The Draft Digital Trade Facilitation Bill, 2026 exports were worth $4.2 billion, and imports worth
released for public feedback $4.4 billion. Key Indian exports to Canada include
drugs and pharmaceuticals, iron and steel, seafood,
Vedika Bhanote (vedika@prsindia.org)
electronic goods, and chemicals. Key imports to India
The Department for Promotion of Industry and from Canada include pulses, fertilisers, coal, petroleum
International Trade released the draft Digital Trade crude, and semi-precious metals. India also exports
Facilitation Bill, 2026 for public feedback.19 The Bill services to Canada including telecommunications, and
seeks to facilitate the use of electronic documents in computer and information services.
trade. Key provisions include:
 Legal recognition of electronic documents:
Electronic trade documents refer to any trade
document or instrument in electronic form. Such
documents will have complete legal validity. They
- 5 -
Monthly Policy Review – March 2026 PRS Legislative Research
Home Affairs Amendments to the Companies Act, 2013
 Corporate Social Responsibility (CSR): The Bill
Jahanvi Choudhary (jahanvi@prsindia.org)
updates the net profit threshold for mandatory CSR
The CAPFs (General Administration) Bill, for companies to Rs 10 crore or such other sum that
2026 introduced in Rajya Sabha may be prescribed. It also states that companies
fulfilling prescribed conditions will not be required
The Central Armed Police Forces (CAPFs) (General
to comply with CSR provisions.
Administration) Bill, 2026 was introduced in Rajya
Sabha. The Bill seeks to regulate matters related to  Small companies: Under the Act, a small
recruitment, deputation, promotion, and conditions of company is a company with: (i) paid-up share
service of CAPFs. Key features of the Bill include: capital not exceeding Rs 50 lakh or a higher
prescribed amount not exceeding Rs 10 crore,
 Positions to be filled by deputation: The Bill
and (ii) turnover not exceeding Rs 2 crore or a
requires the following positions to be filled by
higher prescribed amount not exceeding Rs 100
deputation of Indian Police Services (IPS) offices:
crore. The Bill increases the upper limit of: (i)
(i) 50% of posts in the rank of Inspector General,
share capital to Rs 20 crore, and (ii) turnover to
(ii) at least 67% of posts in the rank of Additional
Rs 200 crore.
Director General, and (iii) all posts in the rank of
Director General and Special Director General.  Buy-back of shares: Under the Act, a company
may purchase its own shares or other specified
 Powers to make Rules: The Bill empowers the
securities (referred to as buy-back). Buy-back
central government to make Rules related to
must not exceed 25% of the aggregate of paid-up
officers of five CAPFs. These include: (i) Central
capital and free reserves of the company. It adds
Reserve Police Force, (ii) Border Security Force,
that for prescribed classes of companies, buyback
(iii) Central Industrial Security Force, (iv) Indo-
may be up to a prescribed percentage.
Tibetan Border Police, and (v) Sashastra Seema
Bal. The officers include: (i) Group A (general Amendments to the LLP Act, 2008
duty or executive) officers of rank of Assistant
 Conversion of trusts into LLP: It provides for
Commandant and above, (ii) officers on deputation
conversion of specified trusts into LLPs. This
from IPS, and (iii) officers on deputation or re-
applies to trusts that: (i) have been established
employment from Indian Army.
under the Indian Trusts Act, 1882 or any other
 The central government may amend the Schedule central or state Act, (ii) are registered with SEBI or
by notification to add other CAPFs. It can also IFSC Authority, and (iii) are engaged in prescribed
make Rules notwithstanding any other law, any activities.
judgement or order of any Court, or any
RBI issues directions on declaration of
government order.
dividend and remittance of profits
For PRS summary of the Bill, see here.
The Reserve Bank of India released directions on
prudential norms on declaration of dividend and
remittance of profits.23 These will apply to commercial
Finance banks, small finance banks, payments banks, local area
banks, and regional rural banks. Key directions
Shrusti Singh (shrusti@prsindia.org) include:
Bill to amend Corporate Laws introduced in  Eligibility criteria: Currently, one of the
Lok Sabha requirements for a bank to be eligible to declare
dividends is that it must have a positive adjusted
The Corporate Laws (Amendment) Bill, 2026 was profit after tax (PAT) for the year. Adjusted PAT
21
introduced in Lok Sabha on March 23, 2026. The is calculated by deducting the net non-performing
Bill seeks to amend the Companies Act, 2013 and the assets of the bank. The directions add that the
Limited Liability Partnership (LLP) Act, 2008. It has regulatory capital of the bank should not fall below
been referred to a Joint Committee which is required to the applicable regulatory capital requirements even
submit its report by the last day of first week of the after paying dividend.
22
Monsoon Session, 2026. Key amendments proposed
 Maximum dividend payable: According to the
under the Bill include:
directions, entities which fulfil certain prudential
 Decriminalisation of offences: The Bill requirements will be allowed to declare and pay
decriminalises several offences under the two Acts. dividend in aggregate up to 75% of the PAT for a
It imposes civil penalty for such offences instead of proposed period. Under the current framework,
imprisonment or fine such as: (i) wilful failure to banks are allowed to pay dividend up to 40% of
furnish information related to the affairs of a their net profits in a financial year.
producer company, (ii) contravention of Rules, or
(iii) violation of requirements on books of account.
- 6 -
Monthly Policy Review – March 2026 PRS Legislative Research
 Deduction from PAT: The directions provide for SEBI releases recommendations of the High-
the exclusion of some transactions from the Level Committee on conflict of interest for
calculation of PAT. These include extraordinary officials of SEBI
profits/ incomes, net unrealised gains from
valuation of level 3 financial instruments, and SEBI reviewed the recommendations of the High-Level
overstated profits of small finance banks, payments Committee (HLC) on matters relating to conflict of
bank, and commercial banks (if flagged by the interest and disclosures by officials of SEBI.25 It
statutory auditor). approved the following recommendations of the HLC:
 Remittance of profits by foreign banks:  Investments at the time of joining: Chairman
According to the directions, foreign banks and Whole-Time Members (WTMs) will be
operating in India through branches may remit brought within the definition of “insiders”. Any
their normal net profit/surplus from Indian investments by held by these officials in equity and
operations to their Head Office. This will be equity-related instruments at the time of joining
allowed only if their accounts have been audited. must be liquidated, frozen, or sold. In addition,
any investments in commercial ventures (including
RBI releases draft framework to limit customer
unlisted shares) will have to be fully liquidated or
liability in digital transactions kept frozen during their tenure.
The Reserve Bank of India issued draft amendment  Limit on individual investment: New
directions for review of framework of limiting investments by employees/WTMs/Chairman in
customer liability in digital transactions.24 These products managed by a single SEBI-registered
directions will apply to the following entities: (i) intermediary should not exceed 25% of their
commercial banks, (ii) small finance banks, (iii) financial portfolio. In case such officials exceed
payments banks, (iv) local area banks, (v) regional rural this limit, they must recuse from all the matters
banks, and (vi) urban and rural co-operative banks. involving that individual intermediary. The Board
also approved the proposal to set up a digital
The directions provide a compensation mechanism for
system and recusal framework to record disclosure
small-value fraudulent electronic banking transactions
of conflicted relationships and grant of approvals.
up to Rs 50,000. Under the framework, a fraudulent
electronic banking transaction is defined as an  Disclosure: Employees, WTMs, and the
authorised transaction where credentials are Chairman must make initial, annual, and event-
fraudulently obtained, approval is coerced, customers based disclosures of assets, liabilities, trading
are tricked into sending money to a scammer, or activities, and relationships to SEBI. The details
unauthorised transactions. of immovable properties of Chairman, WTMs,
Executive Directors, and Chief General Managers
The customer will be compensated with 85% of the net
may be publicly disclosed. Part-time members
loss amount or Rs 25,000 (whichever is lower). A
will also be required to make disclosures to SEBI
customer will be allowed to avail the compensation
about shareholdings and past assignments (up to
under this scheme only once during his/her lifetime.
three years) at the time of assuming office and
The bank will be liable to compensate the customer further on an annual basis. Part-time members will
within five calendar days from the receipt of their not be required to make any public disclosures.
application. Further, the bank can seek reimbursement
 Investment restrictions on family members:
of this compensation amount from the RBI on a
Direct investment (in shares) restrictions
quarterly basis. However, the loss arising from any
applicable to Chairman/WTMs/ employees will
unauthorised transaction occurring after the reporting
also extend to their spouses and dependent family
of the fraud by the customer to a bank will be borne by
members. These restrictions will apply to future
the bank.
investments. Some investments will not be
The burden of proving customer liability shall lie on covered under these restrictions including
the bank. The customer will have no liability and will investments in unlisted securities, Employee Stock
be entitled to reversal of the transaction where the Ownership Plans.
fraudulent transaction occurs due to negligence on the
SEBI issues consultation papers on various
part of the bank. This will also apply in cases of third-
subjects
party breach where the customer reports the
unauthorised fraudulent transaction within five
SEBI released consultation papers on various subjects.
calendar days from occurrence.
These include the following:
The proposed compensation mechanism proposed will
 Gift Card/gift prepaid payment instrument
be in force for one year from the date of directions.
(PPI) for Mutual Funds: Currently, banks and
Comments are invited by April 6, 2026. non-bank entities are allowed to issue PPIs after
approval from RBI.26 Under the proposed
framework, the recipient will be able to utilise a
gift PPI to subscribe to units of mutual funds. The
- 7 -
Monthly Policy Review – March 2026 PRS Legislative Research
flow of money from the issuer, purchaser, and stock-broking activities. This exemption is also being
redeemer of the gift PPI will be regulated by RBI, extended to stock brokers which are primary dealers.
while the subscription to mutual funds will be SEBI also shifts the responsibility for reporting demat
governed by SEBI. Investments made through accounts from stock brokers to depositories.
Gift PPIs, e-wallets, and cash will be subject to an
These provisions will take effect from April 17, 2026.
existing threshold of Rs 50,000 per mutual fund
house per financial year. The maximum limit
under each PPI will be Rs 10,000 and will be valid
for a period of one year from the date of issuance.
Transport
The redeemer of the gift card must utilise the full
value of the instrument. Once exhausted, funds
Navya Sriram (navya@prsindia.org)
cannot be reloaded to the instrument. Comments
are invited by April 14, 2026.
Ministry of Civil Aviation mandates 60% seats
 Simplification of documentation for to be allocated free of charge
transmission of securities: SEBI is proposing to
The Ministry of Civil Aviation has issued directions
simplify the documentation requirement for
requiring at least 60% of seats on all flights to be
transmission of securities to legal heirs.27 It allocated free of charge.30 Directions also require: (i)
proposes to revise the threshold for availing passengers travelling on the same PNR to be seated
simplified documentation from five lakh rupees to together, (ii) transparent and passenger friendly
10 lakh rupees for physical securities and from 15 carriage of sports and music equipment, (iii) strict
to 30 lakh rupees for demat securities. In addition, adherence to passenger rights in case of delays,
physical securities up to 10 thousand rupees and cancellations and denied boardings, and (iv) prominent
demat securities up to 30 thousand rupees can be display of passenger rights.
processed with minimal documentation through a
new and faster framework. The proposed Cabinet approves modified UDAN scheme
framework also standardises procedures for
The Union Cabinet approved the modified UDAN
receiving claims and documentation, removes the
scheme to improve regional connectivity.31 The
requirement of probated wills for certain cases, and
scheme will be implemented over 10 years from 2026–
streamlines timelines for claim settlement.
27 to 2035–36. It will have a total outlay of Rs 28,840
Comments are invited by April 2, 2026.
crore provided through budgetary support from the
 IT Resilience Index for Market Infrastructure central government. The earlier UDAN scheme was
Institutions (MIIs): SEBI has proposed an IT implemented from 2016 to 2026, with a total outlay of
resilience Index for MIIs which would be Rs 4,500 crore. Under the scheme, over 500 routes and
computed on a half-yearly basis.28 MIIs include more than 75 airports, including heliports and water
aerodromes.32 Key features of the modified UDAN
stock exchanges, depositories, and clearing
scheme include:
corporations. The index will be calculated on the
basis of parameters such as availability, security,  Viability gap funding: Provision of Viability Gap
integrity, governance, reliability and monitoring, Funding (VGF) towards airlines will continue.
and business continuity. The Industry Standards Under the scheme, Rs 10,043 crore has been
Forum will be responsible to formulate baseline proposed towards VGF over a 10-year period.
parameter, acceptable thresholds, and the Standard
 Development of aerodromes: 100 airports will
OP for calculating the index. Comments are
be developed from existing unserved airstrips. An
invited by April 15, 2026.
outlay of Rs 12,159 crore has been proposed for
SEBI relaxes reporting requirements for stock this purpose over the next eight years.
brokers
 Development of helipads: 200 modern helipads
SEBI has issued amendments to the Master Circular for will be developed in hilly, remote, island and
Stock Brokers to offer relaxations from some reporting aspirational regions to help improve access in
obligations.29 Under the current framework, all demat regions where conventional airport infrastructure
accounts maintained by a stock broker are required to may not always be feasible.
be tagged. However, brokers that are also banks are
 Support for operation and maintenance
exempted from this requirement for accounts used for
(O&M): Under the modified scheme, O&M
banking activities. This exemption is now being
support will be provided for three years, capped at
extended to brokers which are also primary dealers for
Rs 3.06 crore per annum per airport and Rs 90 lakh
demat accounts used in non-broking activities.
per annum per heliport or water aerodrome. This
Currently, every stock broker is required to report all component is estimated to cost Rs 2,577 crore and
bank accounts to the stock exchange within seven would support around 441 aerodromes.
working days of opening. Stock brokers that are also
banks are only required to report bank accounts used for
- 8 -
Monthly Policy Review – March 2026 PRS Legislative Research
National Highways Fee (Determination of  Reducing import dependence: The Committee
Rates and Collection) (Second Amendment) recommended expanding oilseeds and pulse
Rules notified procurement under PM-AASHA from current
25% of the total production to 100%. The
The National Highways Fee (Determination of Committee suggested imposing a 20% safeguard
Rates and Collection) Rules, 2008 (framed under duty (or any other rate) on imports of palm oil if
the National Highways Act, 1956) were the global oil prices fall below USD 800 per
amended.33,34 The Rules provide for the levy, tonne or any other rate fixed by the government.
determination, and collection of user fees (toll) on
 Need for a new Seeds Bill: The Committee
national highways to recover the cost of
observed that the Seeds Act, 1966 must be
construction, maintenance, and operation of
reviewed to reflect the needs of the modern
highway infrastructure. The amendment provides
oilseeds and pulses sector. The Committee
for the manner of recovering unpaid user fee.
recommended bringing a new Seeds Bill to
These rules came into effect on March 17, 2026.
ensure timely access to high-quality seeds,
 Definition of unpaid user fee: The mandatory certification, and revised standards of
amendment adds that unpaid user fee will be production and quality control in the industry.
defined as the fee payable by a motor vehicle
 Price ceiling for seeds: The Committee
for using section of a National Highway,
recommended setting up of a National
where the Electronic Toll Collection
Commission/Regulatory Body to fix an upper
Infrastructure has recorded the passage of the
ceiling for prices of seeds in the country. It
vehicle but the fee has not been received.
suggested adopting a consultative and transparent
 Penalty: The unpaid user fee will be twice the process to fix the price ceiling reflecting the true
applicable toll amount. However, if paid cost of seeds. This body will have
within 72 hours of issuance of the e-notice, representatives from state governments, industry
only the original user fee has to be paid. The associations, and farmers.
vehicle owner may submit an application
 Curbing imports of genetically modified (GM)
through the designated portal for grievance
seeds/food: The Committee noted the illegal
redressal within 72 hours of issuance.
imports and sales of GM foods in the country
 Where the unpaid user fee remains unpaid and its negative impact on human health. To
beyond 15 days, the amount will be recorded address this, it recommended strict enforcement
in the VAHAN system (national vehicle of laws, upgradation of lab infrastructure at
registration database) and restrictions may be ports, higher surveillance, and mandatory
imposed until dues are cleared. labelling of food to detect GM ingredients
informing consumer choices.
 Manner of collecting unpaid user fee: An
electronic notice will be issued to registered For a PRS summary of the report, see here.
vehicle owners specifying the vehicle details,
Standing Committee submits report on
date and location of passage, and the amount
due. The e-notice would be sent through research related to water efficient seeds
SMS, email, or mobile based applications
Ayush Stephen Toppo (ayush@prsindia.org)
while also being made available on an online
portal and the VAHAN database. The central The Standing Committee on Agriculture (Chair: Mr.
government may integrate the National Charanjit Singh Channi) presented its report on the
Electronic Toll Collection system with the ‘Research for Developing Water Efficient Variety of
VAHAN registry for enforcement and Seeds to Save Ground Water’ on March 27, 2026. The
realisation of unpaid user fee. Committee examined ongoing programmes that seek to
develop water efficient varieties of seeds. Key
recommendations of the Committee include: (i) using
modern biotechnological tools such as gene editing for
Agriculture genetic improvement of crops, (ii) strengthening
research and development ecosystem of Indian Council
Standing committee report on production and of Agricultural Research, (iii) establishing a
availability of oilseeds and pulses mechanism to guide farmers on suitable crop choices
and farming practices in critical water zones, (iv)
Shrusti Singh (shrusti@prsindia.org)
strengthening of the existing seed production and
The Standing Committee on Agriculture, Animal distribution network to meet the increasing demand of
Husbandry, and Food Processing (Chair: Mr. Charanjit quality and affordable seeds, and (v) constituting an
Singh Channi) presented its report on ‘Production and apex body or committee to coordinate between
Availability of Oilseeds and Pulses in the Country’ on different ministries, departments, and agencies.
March 27, 2026. Key observations and
For a PRS summary of the report, see here.
recommendations of the Committee are as follows:
- 9 -
Monthly Policy Review – March 2026 PRS Legislative Research
External Affairs and (vi) integration of project staff with 15 years of
experience into regular workforce.
Navya Sriram (navya@prsindia.org)
For a PRS summary of the report, see here.
Prime Minister speaks with President of Iran
Prime Minister Mr Narendra Modi had a telephone
conversation with the President of Iran, Dr Masoud
Pharmaceuticals
Pezeshkian on March 12, 2026.35 India expressed
concern regarding the ongoing conflict in West Asia,
Jahanvi Choudhary (jahanvi@prsindia.org)
and reiterated that all issues must be resolved through
dialogue and diplomacy. Here, he also highlighted that
Comments invited on draft amendments to the
the safety and well-being of Indian nationals in the
Drugs Rules, 1945
region, including Iran is India’s priority, alongside
unhindered transit of energy and goods.35 The Ministry of Health and Family Welfare has
released two draft amendments to the Drugs Rules,
Finland President’s visit to India
1945 for public feedback.38,39 The Rules are issued
The President of Finland, Dr Alexander Stubb, paid a under the Drugs and Cosmetics Act, 1940.40,41 The Act
State Visit to India from March 4 to March 7, 2026.36 provides regulatory mechanism for import,
The visit saw the signing of various MoUs between the manufacture, and sale of drugs and cosmetics in India.
two countries on: (i) migration and mobility Key proposed amendments include:
partnerships, (ii) environmental cooperation including
 Changes to testing requirements of blood
bioenergy, green hydrogen, and wind, solar and small
products: The 1945 Rules require manufactured
hydra power, and (iii) sharing best practices in the
blood products (such as Human Albumin, Human
collection of official statistics. Announcements
Normal Immunoglobulin) to conform to the
entailing the future roadmap between the two countries
standards specified in the Indian Pharmacopoeia
were also made. These include: (i) elevating bilateral
and if such standards are not specified then to
relations to “Strategic Partnership in Digitisation and
those specified in the United States or British
Sustainability”, (ii) joint research calls between
Pharmacopoeia. The products must also be tested
Department of Science and Technology of India and
negative for HIV I and HIV II antibodies, Hepatitis
Finnish Innovation Funding Agency Business Finland,
B surface antigens, and Hepatitis C virus
(iii) aims to capitalise on the India-European Union
antibodies. The draft Rules remove the HIV and
Free Trade Agreement, and double the present bilateral
hepatitis testing requirements.38
trade between India and Finland by 2030, (iv)
establishing a cross sectoral joint working group on  Changes in reporting requirements: The draft
digitisation, (v) creating a joint task force on 6G, (vi) Rules require a manufacturer to inform the Drugs
enabling greater connectivity of startup ecosystems Controller if there is a change in an imported or a
through Indo-Finland Startup Corridor, and (vii) co- manufactured drug product. This includes changes
hosting of World Circular Economy Forum in India. in the manufacturing process, packaging, shelf life,
or testing of the drug. In case of any major or
moderate quality change, they must obtain prior
approval from the Drugs Controller. Major or
Health moderate change imply a substantial or moderate
potential to have an adverse impact on the identity,
Jahanvi Choudhary (jahanvi@prsindia.org) strength, quality, purity, or potency of a drug
product, respectively.
Standing Committee submitted report on
working of AIIMS, New Delhi Comments on both sets of draft Rules are invited until
April 8, 2026.
The Standing Committee on Health (Chair: Prof. Ram
Gopal Yadav) presented its report on ‘Working of All
India Institute of Medical Sciences (AIIMS), New
Delhi and problems faced by patients in availing
Mining
healthcare and treatment’.37
Key recommendations of the Committee include: (i) Vaishali Dhariwal (vaishali@prsindia.org)
establishment of another AIIMS in Delhi-NCR and in Draft Mineral Exchange Rules released for
states including Karnataka, (ii) shifting of speciality
public consultation
centres to decongest OPDs, (iii) increasing number of
beds in neonatal centres and cardiology, neurology, and The Ministry of Mines released Draft Mineral
trauma departments, (iv) filling of vacancies in faculty Exchange Rules, 2026 for public consultation. 42 The
and non-faculty positions and speciality programs, (v) draft Rules have been released under the Mines and
strengthening diagnostic services at district hospitals, Minerals (Development and Regulation) Act, 1957,
which provides for establishment of Mineral
- 10 -
Monthly Policy Review – March 2026 PRS Legislative Research
Exchanges. 43 A Mineral Exchange is a registered of mineral despatched, which will apply to all
electronic trading platform or marketplace where minerals in the block. The successful bidder will
buyers and sellers of minerals (or its processed forms pay this percentage of the value of minerals
like metals) can trade. The Rules seek to provide for despatched to the state government periodically.
trade of minerals other than coal, lignite and atomic The amendment adds that if any of the critical
minerals. Key features of the Draft Rules include: minerals (other than graphite, phosphate, and
potash) constitute less than 10% of the total value of
 Registration of Mineral Exchanges: To be eligible
the block, no auction premium will be payable on
for registration of mineral exchange, the applicant
such minerals.
must be: (i) incorporated under the Companies Act,
2013, (ii) demutualised (ownership and  Forest area exclusion: State governments may
management is separate from trading rights), and allow a preferred bidder to exclude from the lease a
(iii) satisfy the specified ownership requirements. portion of the block falling in forest land as mining
Only exchanges registered under these Rules will be in such portion is not feasible due to issues such as
allowed to operate. Any entity under operation forest, wildlife corridor, river, nallah, habitation, or
before commencement of the rules will be required infrastructure etc. Such portion must contain less
to register within six months of operationalisation than 25% of the total estimated mineral resources.
of the first mineral exchange. Registration will be
 Revised upfront payments: The 2015 Rules
valid for 25 years.
specify that the second (20%) and third (60%)
 Governance of Mineral Exchange: Board of instalments of the upfront payment must be paid at
Directors of a mineral exchange will consist of: (i) specified stages by holder of a composite licence.
shareholder directors, (ii) independent directors, and The amendment removes these fixed percentages.
(iii) managing director. Independent directors must It adds that for auctions after the 2026 amendment,
be at least equal in number to shareholder directors the second instalment must be paid within one year
(the managing director will be counted as a from the date of issue of the letter of intent.
shareholder director for this purpose).
Amendments to Rules on mineral leasing and
 Functions of the Authority: The Indian Bureau of inclusion notified
Mines will be the regulatory authority. It will have
The Ministry of Mines notified amendments to the
the power to register and regulate exchanges,
Minerals (Other than Atomic and Hydro Carbons
approve contracts, conduct inspections, undertake
Energy Minerals) Concession Rules, 2016.47,48 The
market oversight, and revoke registration for certain
Rules have been released under the Mines and Minerals
violations. It may also intervene in the market in
(Development and Regulation) Act, 1957 which
cases of abnormal price volatility or manipulation.
provides for development, exploration, extraction, and
 Risk Management: Mineral exchanges will be management of minerals.49 The Rules prescribe the
required to constitute a risk assessment and procedures for regulating the grant of mineral
management committee which will undertake concessions. Key amendments include:
periodic reviews. All mineral exchanges will be
 Application for inclusion of minerals: The 2016
required to establish a settlement guarantee fund,
Rules provide mining lease for a specified mineral.
clearing and settlement mechanisms, and
As per the amendment, holder of a mining lease
procedures to handle defaults. Exchanges will also
may apply for the inclusion of any additional
be required to establish grievance redressal
mineral, including minor minerals, in the lease. The
mechanisms for members and clients and have a
state government must decide on such application
pre-approved exit plan.
within 60 days.
Comments are invited until April 18, 2026.
 Inclusion of contiguous area in mining lease: The
Amendments to Mineral Auction Rules, 2015 holder of a mining lease or composite license for
notified deep seated minerals may apply to the state
government for inclusion of a contiguous area.
The Ministry of Mines notified amendments to the
Deep seated minerals have been defined as minerals
Mineral Auction Rules, 2015 which provide the
that occur at a depth of more than 200 meters from
procedure for grant of mineral concessions.44,45 The
surface land. The state government may grant such
Rules have been prescribed under the Mines and
extension, subject to prescribed conditions,
Minerals (Development and Regulation) Act, 1957
including that the contiguous area does not exceed
which provides for development, exploration,
10% of the leased area in the case of a mining lease
extraction, and management of minerals.46 Key
and 30% in the case of a composite licence.
amendments include:
 Inclusion of other minerals in a mining lease:
 Revision of auction premium requirements: The
Mining lease for a minor mineral having an area of
2015 Rules specify that if the area is being
more than two hectares will not be granted unless a
auctioned for more than one mineral, the bidder will
preliminary exploration has been completed.
be required to quote a single percentage of the value
Where any other mineral is discovered in an area
- 11 -
Monthly Policy Review – March 2026 PRS Legislative Research
covered by a minor mineral lease, the lease holder Draft amendments to the End-of-life Vehicles
must report such discovery within six months of Rules released
notification of the Rules or within 60 days of
The Ministry of Environment, Forest and Climate
discovery, whichever is later. Holder of a mining
Change has released draft amendments to the
lease may apply to the state government for
Environment Protection (End-of-Life Vehicles) Rules,
inclusion of such minerals into lease.
2025 for public feedback.52,53 The draft Rules have
 If an atomic mineral is discovered during been issued under the Environment (Protection) Act,
exploration, and its grade meets or exceeds the 1986 and provide for environmentally sound
prescribed threshold value, the mining lease will be dismantling, recycling, and disposal of end-of-life
terminated. vehicles.54 The draft amendments propose the
following key changes:
 Financial obligations: In cases where any other
mineral is included in a minor mineral lease, the  Responsibilities of producers: Under the 2025
lease holder is required to pay the additional Rules, producers are made responsible for the safe
amount specified under the 1957 Act. Where the disposal and recycling of end-of-life vehicles under
lease was auctioned and the auction premium was an Extended Producer Responsibility (EPR)
not linked to the value of mineral dispatched, the framework, with annual targets and the option to
lease holder must pay an amount equivalent to the meet obligations through EPR certificates from
royalty of the included minerals. registered recyclers.
As per the amendment, producers will also be
responsible for the safe disposal and management
Environment and Water of waste generated from end-of-life vehicles,
including recycling and reuse in future production.
Vaishali Dhariwal (vaishali@prsindia.org) Producers may also meet their EPR obligations by
purchasing EPR certificates issued by registered
Cabinet approves extension of Jal Jeevan
recyclers. Producers must ensure that from 2026-
Mission until December 2028
27 onwards, at least 10% of the total steel used in
The Union Cabinet has approved the extension of the vehicles is recycled steel. Producers must declare
Jal Jeevan Mission (JJM) till December 2028, with an detailed data such as quantity of steel, tyres, oil
enhanced outlay of Rs 8.7 lakh crore.50 The Cabinet and plastic used in the vehicles that were
also approved restructuring of the Mission. JJM aims introduced in the domestic market from 2005-06 to
to provide safe and adequate drinking water through tap 2024-25, by June 30, 2026.
connections to all rural households.
 Revised steel recovery targets: Under the 2025
Under the restructured JJM, each village will be Rules, producers are required to recover 18% of
assigned a unique service area ID, and the entire the steel used in all vehicles sold in 2019-20 by
drinking water supply system will be digitally mapped. 2039-40. The draft amendments propose higher
Gram Panchayats will be required to certify completion targets, increasing recovery to around 50-55% for
of works and confirm operation and maintenance works vehicles sold in 2025-26, and to 70-75% for those
being undertaken by the state government. It will also sold in 2035-36.
include an annual, community-led maintenance and
 Responsibilities of insurance companies:
review exercise.
Insurance companies will be required to register on
Cabinet approves Nationally Determined a centralised online portal of the State Pollution
Control Board. They must ensure that end-of-life
Contribution targets for 2031-35
vehicles are deposited at registered vehicle
The Union Cabinet approved India’s Nationally scrapping facilities or designated Collection
Determined Contribution (NDCs) for 2031-35.51 Centres, and report such deposits to the relevant
NDCs are climate action targets submitted by countries Board. Insurance Regulatory and Development
under the United Nations Framework Convention on Authority of India will prescribe and enforce
Climate Change. responsibilities of insurance companies.
As per the updated targets, India aims to reduce the Comments are invited till May 26, 2026.
emissions intensity of its GDP by 47% by 2035 from
2005 levels. Emissions intensity of GDP refers to the
amount of greenhouse gas (GHG) emissions produced
per unit of economic output. Updated targets also aim
to achieve a 60% share of non-fossil fuel-based energy
resources in installed capacity by 2035. Further, India
aims to create an additional carbon sink of 3.5 - 4
billion tonnes of CO₂ equivalent through increased
forest and tree cover by 2035 from 2005 levels.
- 12 -
Monthly Policy Review – March 2026 PRS Legislative Research
Power CERC notifies amendments to regulations on
renewable energy certificates
Ayush Stephen Toppo (ayush@prsindia.org)
The Central Electricity Regulatory Commission
Comments invited on amendments to the
(CERC) notified the CERC (Terms and Conditions for
Rights of Consumers Rules Renewable Energy Certificates for Renewable Energy
Generation) (First Amendment) Regulations, 2026.57
The Ministry of Power has invited comments on the
This seeks to amend the CERC (Terms and Conditions
draft Electricity (Rights of Consumers) Amendment
for Renewable Energy Certificates for Renewable
Rules, 2026.55 The draft Rules seek to amend the
Energy Generation) (First Amendment) Regulations,
Electricity (Rights of Consumers) Rules, 2020.56 The
2022.58 Renewable Energy Certificates (RECs) are
2020 Rules lay down the rights of electricity
tradable certificates representing one megawatt-hour
consumers, including provisions relating to metering,
(MWh) of electricity generated from renewable
billing, and access to electricity services. Key features
sources. RECs can be bought to meet Renewable
of the draft Rules include:
Consumption Obligations instead of purchasing
 Applicability of Time-of-Day tariffs: Under the renewable energy. These obligations mandate that a
2020 Rules, Time-of-Day tariffs (ToD) apply to certain percentage of electricity purchased by entities
specified Commercial and Industrial Consumers (such as discoms) must be sourced from renewables.
(C&I) from April 1, 2024. For other consumers
RECs are issued per unit of electricity generated, based
(excluding agriculture), it is applicable from April
on a certificate multiplier. Earlier, the certificate
1, 2025. The draft Rules amend these provisions to
multipliers were based on tariffs of RE projects. The
mandate ToD tariffs for C&I consumers from April
2026 Regulations provide for the determination of
1, 2027. For other consumers (excluding
multipliers based on tariff of RE projects, technology
agriculture), SERCs will determine the timeline.
maturity of such projects, and the level of the capacity
This timeline cannot be beyond April 1, 2028.
credit. Capacity credit refers to the reliable
 Net-metering charges: The draft Rules introduce a contribution of a power plant such as those based on
net metering charge to be determined and levied by solar or wind in meeting peak demand.
State Electricity Regulatory Commissions (SERCs).
The net metering charge will be levied
progressively based on the imputed cost of storage
and network loss adjustments as determined by Electronics and IT
SERCs. No net metering charges will be levied for
an installed solar PV of capacity up to five kilowatts Ayush Stephen Toppo (ayush@prsindia.org)
(kW). Net metering is a facility whereby solar
Standing Committee submits report on Impact
energy exported to the grid by a prosumer (producer
of AI
who is also a consumer) is deducted from energy
imported from the grid to arrive at the net imported The Standing Committee on Communications and
energy. For billing purposes, only the net energy Information Technology (Chair: Dr. Nishikant Dubey)
import is used. submitted its report on the ‘Impact of emergence of
Artificial Intelligence (AI) and related issues’ on March
 Energy storage systems for rooftop solar: The
30, 2026.59 The Committee noted that implementing
2026 draft Rules empower SERCs to mandate
AI at scale faces fundamental barriers such as limited
installation of energy storage systems for
computing facilities, shortage of skills, and a lack of
installations with capacity above 500 kW.
adequate datasets. It also noted challenges in adoption
 Automatic review of bills: The draft Rules of AI such as market concentration, a lack of
mandate distribution licencees to actively review interpretability of AI models, and concerns with
cases of inflated or abnormally low bills. If a privacy and quality. In case of agriculture, it
consumer's consumption during any billing cycle highlighted concerns such as high initial investment
exceeds five times (or as decided by SERC) the and a lack of high-speed internet in rural areas.
average of the preceding six billing cycles, the
The Committee observed that risks associated with AI
licensee must review and resolve the issue within
include deepfakes, cyber threats, AI-based surveillance,
30 days. Similarly, if a consumer's consumption
and AI-enabled financial fraud. It noted that draft
falls below one-fifth (or as decided by SERC) of the
amendments to IT Rules have been proposed to further
average consumption during the preceding six
strengthen regulatory framework with regard to AI.
billing cycles, the licensee must review the case and
take appropriate action within 30 days. Key recommendations of the Committee include: (i)
exploring possibility of a comprehensive legislation to
Comments are invited by April 11, 2026.
prevent the misuse of AI, (ii) encouraging courses in AI
in schools and colleges and university research, (iii)
expediting implementation of draft amendments to IT
- 13 -
Monthly Policy Review – March 2026 PRS Legislative Research
Rules, and (iv) exploring age restrictions for certain the Ministry of Electronics and Information
platforms to save people from misuse of AI. Technology. The draft Rules state that such
instruments will be issued in writing and will
For a PRS summary of the report, see here.
specify their legal basis.
Comments invited on draft amendments to the
 Application of Rules in relation to digital media:
IT Rules, 2021
The 2021 Rules separately regulate publishers of
The Ministry of Electronics and Information online curated content and news and current affairs
Technology has invited comments on the draft content (digital media). Under the 2021 Rules,
Information Technology (Intermediary Guidelines and following provisions related to digital media are
Digital Media Ethics Code) Second Amendment Rules, also applicable to intermediaries: (i) powers of the
2026.60 These draft Rules seek to amend the Ministry of Information and Broadcasting to issue
Information Technology (Intermediary Guidelines and directions for deleting, modifying, or blocking
Digital Media Ethics Code) Rules, 2021.61 content, and (ii) blocking of certain information in
Intermediaries are entities that store or transmit data on cases of emergencies where no delay is acceptable.
behalf of other persons, and include telecom and The 2026 draft Rules specify that the 2021 Rules
internet service providers, online marketplaces, search will also apply to news and current affairs content
engines, and social media sites. The 2021 Rules displayed, shared, and stored by users who are not
specify the due diligence requirements for publishers. In addition, the provisions regarding an
intermediaries to claim exemption from liability for any inter-departmental committee to hear grievances
third-party information. Key changes proposed will apply to intermediaries as well as content of
include: users who are not publishers.
 Compliance with clarifications, advisories, and Comments are invited until April 14, 2026.
directions: The 2026 draft Rules require
intermediaries to comply with every clarification,
advisory, order, direction, standard operating
procedure, code of practice or guideline issued by
1 “Developments in India’s Balance of Payments during the Third 10 Report No 4, “Cyber Crimes and Cyber Safety of Women”,
Quarter (October-December) of 2025-26”, Reserve Bank of India, Committee on the Empowerment of Women, Ministry of Home
March 2, 2026, Affairs and Ministry of Electronics and Information technology, Lok
https://rbidocs.rbi.org.in/rdocs/PressRelease/PDFs/PR22016B971CD Sabha, March 23, 2026, https://sansad.in/ls/committee/other-
8D1D8411CA7DEF94DF1EB4768.PDF. parliamentary-standing-committees/8-
2 “Quick Estimate of Index of Industrial Production and Use-Based Empowerment%20of%20Women-
Index for the Month of January 2026”, Ministry of Statistics and nameH=%E0%A4%AE%E0%A4%B9%E0%A4%BF%E0%A4%B2
Programme Implementation, March 2, 2026, %E0%A4%BE%20%E0%A4%B8%E0%A4%B6%E0%A4%95%E0
https://www.mospi.gov.in/uploads/latestReleases/latest_release_1772 %A5%8D%E0%A4%A4%E0%A4%BF%E0%A4%95%E0%A4%B
446993082_bafbeab1-d887-4088-ad79- 0%E0%A4%A3%20%E0%A4%B8%E0%A4%82%E0%A4%AC%E
34bca753b231_IIP_Press_release_January_2026.pdf. 0%A4%82%E0%A4%A7%E0%A5%80%20%E0%A4%B8%E0%A
4%AE%E0%A4%BF%E0%A4%A4%E0%A4%BF.
3 “Quick Estimate of Index of Industrial Production and Use-Based
Index for the Month of February 2025”, Ministry of Statistics and 11 The Jan Vishwas (Amendment of Provisions) Bill, 2026,
Programme Implementation, April 11, 2025, https://prsindia.org/files/bills_acts/bills_parliament/2026/Jan_Vishwa
https://www.mospi.gov.in/sites/default/files/press_release/IIP_PR_11 s_Bill_2026_Text.pdf.
Apr25.pdf. 12 The Foreign Contribution (Regulation) Amendment Bill, 2026,
4 The Transgender (Protection of Rights) Amendment Bill, March 13, https://prsindia.org/files/bills_acts/bills_parliament/2026/Foreign_Co
2026, ntribution_Bill_2026_Text.pdf.
https://prsindia.org/files/bills_acts/bills_parliament/2026/Transgender 13 Press Note No. 2 of 2026, Department for Promotion of Industry
_Bill_2026_Text.pdf. and Internal Trade, Ministry of Commerce and Industry, March 15,
5 The Transgender (Protection of Rights) Act, November 26, 2019, 2026,
https://prsindia.org/files/bills_acts/bills_parliament/2019/The%20Tra https://www.dpiit.gov.in/static/uploads/2026/03/b9da5830b052c2f2d
nsgender%20Persons%20(Protection%20of%20Rights)%20Bill,%20 788593e97d07c63.pdf.
2019%20Bill%20Text.pdf. 14 Consolidated FDI policy, Department for Promotion of Industry
6 Writ Petition (Civil) No 960 of 2021, Hamsaanandini Nanduri vs and Internal Trade, Ministry of Commerce, October 15, 2020,
Union of India and ORS, March 17, 2026, https://www.mofpi.gov.in/sites/default/files/fdi-policycircular-2020-
https://api.sci.gov.in/supremecourt/2021/18032/18032_2021_7_1502 28october2020.pdf.
_69584_Judgement_17-Mar-2026.pdf. 15 The Prevention of Money-Laundering Act, 2002,
7The Code on Social Security, as on November 21, 2025, https://enforcementdirectorate.gov.in/media/pmla/d7162b8f-d022-
https://upload.indiacode.nic.in/view- 4583-b942-
casepdf?type=act&id=AC_CEN_6_0_00036_202036_162322108079 d5bb85dbe796_THE%20PREVENTION%20OF%20MONEY%20L
9. AUNDERING%20ACT,%202002.pdf.
8 Criminal Appeal No 1580 of 2026, Chinthada Anand versus State of 16 The Prevention of Money-Laundering (Maintenance of Records)
Andhra Pradesh and Others, March 24, 2026, Rules, 2005,
https://api.sci.gov.in/supremecourt/2025/26891/26891_2025_16_150 https://fiuindia.gov.in/pdfs/AML_legislation/PMLA_2005.pdf.
1_69653_Judgement_24-Mar-2026.pdf. 17 “Government Restores RoDTEP Rates and Value Caps to Support
9 “The Constitution (Scheduled Castes) Order, 1950”, Ministry of Exporters Amid West Asia Trade Disruptions,” Press Information
Social Justice and Empowerment, Bureau, Ministry of Commerce and Industry, March 23, 2026,
https://socialjustice.gov.in/writereaddata/UploadFile/CONSTITUTIO https://www.pib.gov.in/PressReleasePage.aspx?PRID=2244147&reg
N%20(SC)%20ORDER%201950%20dated%2010081950.pdf. =3&lang=1.
- 14 -
Monthly Policy Review – March 2026 PRS Legislative Research
https://www.pib.gov.in/PressReleasePage.aspx?PRID=1881867&reg
=3&lang=2.
18 “What is RODTEP,” Directorate General of Foreign Trade,
Ministry of Commerce and Industry, as accessed on March 27, 2026, 33 G.S.R. 191(E), Notification, Ministry of Road Transport &
https://www.dgft.gov.in/CP/?opt=RODTEPARR. Highways, March 18, 2026,
https://egazette.gov.in/(S(ae5bwdomtojgias53q13ryos))/ViewPDF.as
19 Trade Notice No. 24/2025-26, Directorate General of Foreign
px.
Trade, Ministry of Commerce and Industry,
https://content.dgft.gov.in/Website/dgftprod/cb2fc214-b604-4cb8- 34 Gazette no 641, Ministry of Road Transport and Highways,
a924- December 5, 2008,
c3a439ad7a14/Trade%20Notice%2024%20dated%2009.02.2026.pdf. https://upload.indiacode.nic.in/showfile?actid=AC_CEN_30_42_000
02_195648_1517807321068&type=rule&filename=g.s.r._838(e)_dt.
20 ‘Terms of Reference Signed for India-Canada Comprehensive
_05.12.2008.pdf
Economic Partnership Agreement,’ Press Information Bureau,
Ministry of Commerce and Industry, March 2, 2026, 35 “Prime Minister Shri Narendra Modi speaks with the President of
https://www.pib.gov.in/PressReleasePage.aspx?PRID=2234674&reg Iran” Ministry of External Affairs, March 12, 2026,
=3&lang=1. https://www.mea.gov.in/press-
releases.htm?dtl/40886/Prime_Minister_Shri_Narendra_Modi_speak
21 The Corporate Laws (Amendment) Bill, 2026,
s_with_the_President_of_Iran.
https://prsindia.org/files/bills_acts/bills_parliament/2026/Corporate_
Laws_(A)_Bill_2026_Text.pdf. 36 “List of Outcomes: Visit of President of Finland (March 04 - 07,
2026)”, Ministry of External Affairs, March 5, 2026,
22 Bulletin I, Lok Sabha, March 23, 2026, https://sansad.in/bcfd8465-
https://www.mea.gov.in/bilateral-
4477-45a1-bda5-73d35c8a8e7c.
documents.htm?dtl/40853/List_of_Outcomes_Visit_of_President_of_
23 “RBI issues Directions on Prudential Norms on Declaration of Finland_March_04__07_2026.
Dividend and Remittance of Profit by Regulated Entities”, Reserve
37 171st report on working of All India Institute of Medical Sciences
Bank of India, March 10, 2026,
(AIIMS), New Delhi and problems faced by patients in availing
https://rbi.org.in/Scripts/BS_PressReleaseDisplay.aspx?prid=62358.
healthcare and treatment, Ministry of Health and Family Welfare,
24 “RBI Issues Draft Amendment Directions for ‘Review of Rajya Sabha, March 18, 2026,
Framework of Limiting Customer Liability in Digital Transactions”, https://sansad.in/getFile/rsnew/Committee_site/Committee_File/Repo
Reserve Bank of India, March 6, 2026, rtFile/14/212/171_2026_3_18.pdf?source=rajyasabha.
https://rbi.org.in/Scripts/BS_PressReleaseDisplay.aspx?prid=62340.
38 Draft 1 of the Drugs (Amendment) Rules, 2026, Ministry of Health
2525 “Key decisions taken in the SEBI Board Meeting dated 23rd and Family Welfare, March 9, 2026,
March, 2026”, Securities and Exchange Board of India, March 23, https://egazette.gov.in/WriteReadData/2026/270812.pdf.
2026,
39 Draft 2 of the Drugs (Amendment) Rules, 2026, Ministry of Health
https://www.sebi.gov.in/media-and-notifications/press-releases/mar- and Family Welfare, March 9, 2026,
2026/key-decisions-taken-in-the-sebi-board-meeting-dated-23rd- https://egazette.gov.in/WriteReadData/2026/270856.pdf.
march-2026_100515.html.
40 The Drugs and Cosmetics Rules, 1945,
26 “Consultation Paper on introduction of Gift Card/ Gift PPI (Prepaid https://cdsco.gov.in/opencms/opencms/system/modules/CDSCO.WE
Payment Instrument) for Mutual Funds”, Securities and Exchange B/elements/download_file_division.jsp?num_id=MTIwMjc=.
Board of India, March 24, 2026, https://www.sebi.gov.in/reports-and-
41 The Drugs and Cosmetics Act, 1940, Ministry of Health and
statistics/reports/mar-2026/consultation-paper-on-introduction-of-
Family Welfare, April 10, 1940,
gift-card-gift-ppi-prepaid-payment-instrument-for-mutual-funds-
https://www.indiacode.nic.in/bitstream/123456789/15278/1/drug_cos
_100505.html .
meticsa1940-23.pdf.
27 “Consultation Paper on Ease of investing - Simplification of
42 Draft Mineral Exchange Rules, 2026, Ministry of Mines, March
documentation requirement for transmission of securities and
19, 2026,
revision in threshold limits for simplified documentation”, Securities
https://mines.gov.in/admin/imgview?filename=69bbea9290e6617739
and Exchange Board of India, March 12, 2026,
22962.pdf.
https://www.sebi.gov.in/reports-and-statistics/reports/mar-
2026/consultation-paper-on-ease-of-investing-simplification-of- 43 Mines and Minerals (Development and Regulation) Act, 1957,
documentation-requirement-for-transmission-of-securities-and- https://mines.gov.in/admin/download/68ac5fc3960e81756127171.pdf
revision-in-threshold-limits-for-simplified-documentation- 44 Mineral (Auction) Second Amendment Rules, 2026, Ministry of
_100289.html. Mines, March 30, 2026,
28 “Consultation Paper on Framework of IT Resilience Index for https://egazette.gov.in/WriteReadData/2026/271424.pdf.
Market Infrastructure Institutions (MIIs)”, Securities and Exchange 45 Mineral (Auction) Rules, 2015,
Board of India, March 25, 2026, https://www.sebi.gov.in/reports-and- https://ibm.gov.in/writereaddata/files/177132228869943bb04a7b6Mi
statistics/reports/mar-2026/consultation-paper-on-framework-of-it- neral_Auction_Rules_2015_Amended_upto_29.01.2026.pdf.
resilience-index-for-market-infrastructure-institutions-miis- 46 Mines and Minerals (Development and Regulation) Act, 1957,
_100569.html. https://ibm.gov.in/writereaddata/files/07102014115602MMDR%20A
29 “Ease of doing business measures - Relaxations in certain reporting ct%201957_10052012.pdf.
requirements for certain Stock Brokers and doing away with the 47 Minerals (Other than Atomic and Hydro Carbons Energy Minerals)
requirement of reporting of demat account”, Securities and Exchange Concession (Second Amendment) Rules, 2026, Ministry of Mines,
Board of India, March 23, 2026, March 30, 2026,
https://www.sebi.gov.in/legal/circulars/mar-2026/ease-of-doing- https://egazette.gov.in/WriteReadData/2026/271467.pdf.
business-measures-relaxations-in-certain-reporting-requirements-for- 48 Minerals (Other than Atomic and Hydro Carbons Energy Minerals)
certain-stock-brokers-and-doing-away-with-the-requirement-of-
Concession Rules, 2016,
reporting-of-demat-account_100511.html.
https://ibm.gov.in/writereaddata/files/10202016094948MCR_2016_1
30 ‘Strengthening Passenger Facilitation in Indian Aviation’, Press 8092016%20from%20SKS.pdf.
Information Bureau, Ministry of Civil Aviation, March 18, 2026, 49 Mines and Minerals (Development and Regulation) Act, 1957,
https://www.pib.gov.in/PressReleasePage.aspx?PRID=2241546&reg
https://ibm.gov.in/writereaddata/files/07102014115602MMDR%20A
=3&lang=1.
ct%201957_10052012.pdf.
31 ‘Cabinet Approves Modified UDAN to Deepen Regional 50 “Cabinet approves extension of Jal Jeevan Mission (JJM)” Press
Connectivity and Expand Inclusive Air Access Across India’, Press
Information Bureau, Ministry of Jal Shakti, March 10, 2026,
Information Bureau, Ministry of Civil Aviation, March 25, 2026,
https://www.pib.gov.in/PressReleasePage.aspx?PRID=2237550&reg
https://www.pib.gov.in/PressReleasePage.aspx?PRID=2245471&reg
=3&lang=2.
=3&lang=1.
51 “Cabinet approves India’s Nationally Determined Contribution
3232 “More than 2.15 lakh UDAN flights have operated and over 1.1
(2031-2035) to be communicated to the United Nations Framework
crore passengers have availed the benefits in UDAN flights so far.”,
Ministry of Civil Aviation, Press Release Bureau, 8 December, 2022,
- 15 -
Monthly Policy Review – March 2026 PRS Legislative Research
Generation) Regulations, Central Electricity Regulatory Commission,
May 9, 2022, https://cercind.gov.in/regulations/REC-Regulations-
Convention on Climate Change” Press Information Bureau, Cabinet,
2022.pdf.
March 25, 2026,
59 Report No. 27, ‘Impact of emergence of Artificial Intelligence and
https://www.pib.gov.in/PressReleasePage.aspx?PRID=2245209&reg
related issues’, Standing Committee on Communications and
=3&lang=1.
Information Technology, Lok Sabha, March 30, 2026,
52 Draft Environment Protection (End-of-Life Vehicles) Amendment https://sansad.in/getFile/app/lsscommittee/Communications%20and
Rules, 2026, Ministry of Environment, Forest and Climate Change, %20Information%20Technology/18_Communications_and_Informat
March 27, 2026, ion_Technology_27.pdf?source=app.
https://egazette.gov.in/WriteReadData/2026/271354.pdf.
60 The Draft Information Technology (Intermediary Guidelines and
53 Environment Protection (End-of-Life Vehicles) Rules, 2025, Digital Media Ethics Code) Second Amendment Rules, Ministry of
https://moef.gov.in/storage/tender/1736422173.pdf. Electronics and Information Technology, March 30, 2026,
54 Environment (Protection) Act, 1986, https://www.meity.gov.in/static/uploads/2026/03/30591fc6e322dcbcc
https://www.indiacode.nic.in/bitstream/123456789/4316/1/ep_act_19 9dae84a0f02e9e7.pdf.
86.pdf. 61 The Information Technology (Intermediary Guidelines and Digital
55 The Draft Electricity (Rights of Consumers) Amendment Rules, Media Ethics Code) Rules, Ministry of Electronics and Information
Ministry of Power, March 12, 2026, Technology, February 25, 2021,
https://powermin.gov.in/sites/default/files/webform/notices/Seeking_ https://www.meity.gov.in/static/uploads/2026/02/550681ab908f8afb1
comments_on_Draft_Electricity_Rights_of_Consumers_Amendment 35b0ad42816a1c9.pdf.
_Rules_2026.pdf.
56 “Government amends Electricity (Rights of Consumers) Rules; DISCLAIMER: This document is being furnished to you for your
amended Rules will further empower consumers, says Union Power information. You may choose to reproduce or redistribute this report
and New & Renewable Energy Minister”, Press Information Bureau, for non-commercial purposes in part or in full to any other person
Ministry of Power, February 23, 2024, with due acknowledgement of PRS Legislative Research (“PRS”).
https://www.pib.gov.in/PressReleaseIframePage.aspx?PRID=200828 The opinions expressed herein are entirely those of the author(s).
9&reg=3&lang=2. PRS makes every effort to use reliable and comprehensive
57 The Central Electricity Regulatory Commission (Terms and information, but PRS does not represent that the contents of the
Conditions for Renewable Energy Certificates for Renewable Energy report are accurate or complete. PRS is an independent, not-for-
Generation) (First Amendment) Regulations, Central Electricity profit group. This document has been prepared without regard to the
Regulatory Commission, March 24, 2026, objectives or opinions of those who may receive it.
https://cercind.gov.in/regulations/207-Noti.pdf.
58 The Central Electricity Regulatory Commission (Terms and
Conditions for Renewable Energy Certificates for Renewable Energy
- 16 -
