Monthly Policy Review
October 2025
Highlights of this Issue
Repo rate kept unchanged at 5.5% (p. 2)
RBI’s Monetary Policy Committee voted to maintain the repo rate at 5.5%. The standing deposit facility rate,
marginal standing facility rate and bank rate also remain unchanged.
Consumer Price Index inflation was 1.7% in the second quarter of 2025-26 (p. 2)
Inflation in the second quarter of 2025-26 was lower than the corresponding quarter last year (4.3%). Food
prices declined by 1.6% in the second quarter of 2025-26.
Cabinet approves terms of reference of the Eighth Central Pay Commission (p. 2)
While making its recommendations, the Commission shall keep in view the country's economic conditions,
fiscal prudence, adequacy of resources and impact on state finances.
Comments invited on the Draft Electricity (Amendment) Bill, 2025 (p. 4)
The draft Bill allows network sharing among distribution licensees operating in the same area. It mandates cost-
reflective tariff and removal of certain cross-subsidies. It also provides for establishing an Electricity Council.
Cabinet approves a mission to boost domestic production of pulses (p. 5)
The Union Cabinet approved a Mission for self-sufficiency in pulses. The Mission will be implemented over a
six-year period, from 2025-26 to 2030-31, with a financial outlay of Rs 11,440 crore.
Comments invited on Draft National Labour and Employment Policy (p. 5)
The draft Policy aims to increase female labour force participation rate, facilitate technology and green
transitions, improve ease of compliance and formalisation, and achieve near zero workplace fatalities.
IT Rules on issuance of content removal orders amended (p. 6)
The amendments require senior-level authorisation for content removal, reasoned intimation, and periodic
review of all such orders issued under the IT Rules, 2021.
Comments invited on draft IT Rules on synthetically generated information (p. 6)
The draft Rules mandate labelling of synthetically generated information. They also require users to declare if
they are uploading synthetically generated information.
Amendments notified to PLI scheme for textiles (p. 7)
Key changes include reduction in minimum investment thresholds, a lower turnover criterion, and expansion of
eligible product categories.
Draft Rules under the National Sports Governance Act, 2025 released (p. 6)
The draft Rules specify details for constitution of the National Sports Board, the National Sports Tribunal, and
national sports governance bodies.
Standing Committees of Parliament have identified issues to examine (p. 8)
Topics include evaluation of DBT schemes for fertilisers, self-sufficiency of APIs for drugs, implementation of
laws affecting the media, and census criteria for defining urban areas.
November 3, 2025
PRS Legislative Research ■ Institute for Policy Research Studies
3rd Floor, Gandharva Mahavidyalaya ■ 212, Deen Dayal Upadhyaya Marg ■ New Delhi – 110002
Tel: (011) 23234801, 43434035 ■ www.prsindia.org
Monthly Policy Review – October 2025 PRS Legislative Research
Wholesale Price Index (WPI) inflation averaged
Macroeconomic Development 0.02% in the second quarter of 2025-26, lower
than 1.8% in the corresponding quarter of 2024-
Shania Ali (shania@prsindia.org) 25.3 In the first quarter of 2025-26, WPI
inflation was 0.3%.
RBI maintains repo rate at 5.5%
The Reserve Bank of India’s (RBI) Monetary
Policy Committee (MPC) voted to maintain the
Finance
policy repo rate (the rate at which RBI lends
money to banks for short-term needs) at 5.5%.1 Shania Ali (shania@prsindia.org)
Other decisions of the MPC include:
Cabinet approves the terms of reference
▪ The standing deposit facility rate (the rate at
which RBI borrows from banks without of the Eighth Central Pay Commission
giving collateral) has been kept unchanged
The Union Cabinet approved the terms of
at 5.25%.
reference of the Eighth Central Pay
▪ The marginal standing facility rate (rate at Commission.4 Central Pay Commissions are
which banks can borrow additional constituted periodically to make
overnight funds from RBI) and the bank rate recommendations on salaries and other service
(rate at which RBI lends money to conditions of central government employees.
commercial banks for the long term) have The Eighth Central Pay Commission was
also been kept unchanged at 5.75%. announced in January 2025. The Commission is
required to submit its report within 18 months of
▪ RBI increased its projection for real GDP
being constituted, keeping in view the following:
growth for 2025-26 from 6.5% to 6.8%.
(i) economic conditions in the country and the
▪ The MPC decided to continue with its need for fiscal prudence, (ii) need to ensure
neutral stance. adequacy of resources for developmental
expenditure and welfare measures, (iii) unfunded
CPI inflation averaged 1.7% in the cost of non-contributory pension schemes, (iv)
possible impact on the finances of state
second quarter of 2025-26
governments as usually they adopt the
Consumer Price Index (CPI) inflation was 1.7% recommendations with some modifications, and
in the second quarter (July-September) of 2025- (v) the prevailing salaries and service conditions
26, lower than the same quarter last year of central public sector undertakings and the
(4.3%).2 In the first quarter (April-June) of private sector. The recommendations are likely
2025-26, CPI inflation was 2.7%. to come into effect from January 1, 2026.
Food prices declined by 1.6% in the second
RBI announces several changes in
quarter of 2025-26, compared to a 6.8% rise in
banking regulations
the corresponding quarter of 2024-25. In the
first quarter of 2025-26, food inflation was 0.6%.
RBI announced several measures in relation to
Figure 1: Monthly inflation in Q2 of 2025-26 the banking sector.5 Key changes include:
(% change, year-on-year)
▪ Risk based premium framework for
3% deposit insurance: Currently, banks are
2.1% charged a premium of 12 paise per Rs 100
2% 1.6% 1.5% of assessable deposits regardless of their
financial soundness. Assessable deposits
1% 0.5%
are types of bank deposits that are covered
0.1%
under a deposit insurance system. RBI has
0%
proposed a risk-based premium model. This
-1% -0.6% -0.6% will help banks that are sounder to save
significantly on the premium paid.
-2%
-1.8% ▪ Review of capital market guidelines for
-2.3% banks: Capital market exposures (CME) of
-3%
CPI WPI Food Inflation banks include investment in securities,
lending against securities and lending to
Jul-25 Aug-25 Sep-25
capital market intermediaries (CMI) such as
stock brokers. These are subject to
Sources: Ministry of Statistics and Programme
regulations including those related to
Implementation; Ministry of Commerce and Industry; PRS.
sectoral exposure limits, single borrower
2
Monthly Policy Review – October 2025 PRS Legislative Research
limits, and margin requirements. Further, ▪ Lending in rupee to persons outside
banks are generally not allowed to finance India: Authorised Dealer banks in India
acquisition of shares. and their overseas branches have been
permitted to lend in Indian Rupees to
RBI has released a draft of the updated
persons resident in Nepal, Bhutan, and Sri
CME guidelines for commercial banks. The
Lanka to facilitate cross-border trade.10
draft outlines ceilings for CME for banks.6
Banks may extend loans for acquisition of
SEBI invites comments on amendments
or against collateral of securities as per their
to mutual fund regulations
approved policy. Loans are not permitted
against certain securities such as partly paid The Securities and Exchange Board of India
shares, bonds and money market (SEBI) released a consultation paper on the
instruments issued by banks, and own proposed amendments to the SEBI (Mutual
securities. Banks may also lend to Funds) Regulations, 1996 (MF Regulations).11,12
individuals to subscribe to shares during a Key changes proposed are:
public offering, provided that these
borrowers contribute a minimum cash ▪ Changes to levies by Asset Management
margin of 25%. Companies (AMCs): The amendments
propose certain changes to charges levied by
Loans to CMIs to fund their day-to-day AMCs. These include: (i) allowing AMCs
operations must comply with the following to charge differential expense ratios based
provisions: (i) only CMIs registered and on the performance of a scheme, (ii)
regulated by a financial sector regulator will removing the additional expense of 0.05%
be eligible, (ii) eligible securities and cash that could be charged on mutual fund
collateral should belong to the borrower, schemes where exit load was applicable,
(iii) banks will not fund acquisition of (iii) increasing the first two slabs of the
securities by CMIs, and (iv) banks will not expense ratio of open-ended active schemes
accept securities as collateral in which by 0.05%, and (iv) excluding statutory
market making operations are carried out by levies such as GST and stamp duty from
CMIs. Market making operations provide expense ratio limits. Expense ratio refers to
liquidity in the market. Banks may now the annual fee a mutual fund charges to
extend loans to Indian companies to finance manage an investor’s money. Exit load is a
acquisitions, subject to a specified threshold. fee charged by mutual funds upon
withdrawal of units before a specified
Similar guidelines have been issued for
small finance banks.7 Comments are invited minimum holding period. Open-ended
schemes do not have a fixed maturity
until November 21, 2025.
period.
▪ Withdrawal of guidelines on enhancing
▪ Management of non-pooled funds: AMCs
credit supply for large borrowers: These
may undertake investment management and
guidelines were issued in August 2016 to
advisory services for non-pooled funds by
address concentration risk arising from
completing requisite registration with SEBI.
aggregate credit exposure of banks to a
Non-pooled funds refer to arrangements
single large corporate borrower. It aimed to
wherein investor money is not combined in
encourage such borrowers to seek funding
a common pool, but is managed separately.
from alternative sources. These guidelines
are now proposed to be withdrawn.8 In this case, AMCs will be subjected to
compliance with additional conditions such
Concentration risk at individual bank-level
as: (i) the unit providing such service shall
is addressed through a different framework.
operate as a distinct business unit with strict
▪ Review of external commercial separation, (ii) the unit will institute
borrowing (ECB) framework: mechanisms to prevent misuse of
Amendments to the Foreign Exchange information obtained from mutual fund
Management (Borrowing and Lending) operations to benefit other client, and (iii)
Regulations, 2018, have been proposed to: such an activity will be undertaken by the
(i) expand the base of borrowers and lenders AMC only through a subsidiary.
eligible for ECB, (ii) link borrowing limits
Comments are invited by November 17, 2025.
to a borrower’s financial strength, (iii)
propose raising of such debt at market
determined rates, and (iv) simplify end-use PFRDA released consultation paper on
restrictions, minimum average maturity enhancing the National Pension System
requirements, and reporting requirements.9
The Pension Fund Regulatory and Development
Authority (PFRDA) released a consultation
3
Monthly Policy Review – October 2025 PRS Legislative Research
paper titled “Enhancing the National Pension 2003.15 The 2003 Act consolidates laws related
System: Proposals for Flexible, Assured and to generation, transmission, and distribution of
Predictable Pension Schemes”.13 The National electricity. Key features of the draft Bill
Pension System (NPS) is a defined contribution include:
scheme wherein the amount contributed is fixed
▪ Network sharing among discoms: Under
and the pension payout depends on returns
the Act, distribution licencees (discoms)
generated by investments. To address subscriber
operating in the same area must maintain
concerns related to adequacy of corpus and
separate networks. The Bill proposes to
predictability of retirement income, PFRDA has
remove this requirement. It allows a discom
proposed three schemes under NPS framework:
to supply electricity using the network of
▪ Pension Scheme-I: This scheme aims to another discom, subject to oversight by
maximise pension wealth through a mix of a State Electricity Regulatory Commissions
step-up systematic withdrawal plan (SWP) (SERCs). It mandates that every discom
and an annuity. The scheme requires a must provide open and non-discriminatory
minimum accumulation period of 20 years, access to its network to other discoms,
with no upper limit. Payouts begin with a subject to payment of charges determined
monthly SWP at 4.5% of the corpus by the SERC.
annually, increasing by 0.25% each year for
▪ Cost-reflective tariff and removal of
10 years. Then, beginning at age 70, an
cross-subsidy: The 2003 Act provides that
annuity is paid for at least 20 years and
retail tariff for electricity must progressively
continues for life. Annuity refers to a
reflect the cost of supply of electricity and
regular periodic payment.
that cross-subsidies must be reduced in a
▪ Pension Scheme-II: This scheme aims to specified manner. Cross-subsidy refers to
provide a target pension with periodic the arrangement of one consumer category
adjustments with inflation-linked to the subsidising the consumption of another
Consumer Price Index for industrial consumer category. The Bill instead
workers. It requires a minimum requires that the tariff must reflect cost of
accumulation period of 20 years, with no supply of electricity. It also requires that
upper limit, and provides for a decumulation cross-subsidies paid by manufacturing
period of 25 years. Decumulation phase enterprises, railways, and metro be fully
refers to the post-retirement period during eliminated within five years of the
which the subscriber starts withdrawing commencement of the amendments.
money from accumulated investments.
▪ Exemption from supply obligation:
Upon the subscriber’s death, the pension
Electricity distribution licensees have a
would be transferred to their spouse, and
universal service obligation to supply power
subsequently to other family members.
to all categories of consumers. This
▪ Pension Scheme-III: This scheme obligation also covers consumers permitted
introduces Pension Credits, where each to source power directly from generators.
credit assures Rs 100 per month post- These are consumers whose maximum
maturity. It requires subscribers to provide power demand exceeds one megawatt. The
inputs on the year of retirement, target Bill allows SERCs to exempt a discom from
pension amount, and security mix for such obligation for such consumers, in
investment. The accumulation period is consultation with the state government.
limited to 15 years while decumulation
▪ Establishment of Electricity Council: The
period is one to five years. It also proposes
Bill establishes an Electricity Council
a potential secondary market for trading
comprising union and state power ministers.
pension credits.
The Council will advise central and state
governments on policy measures and
coordinate the implementation of electricity
sector reforms.
Power
Comments are invited until November 8, 2025.
Ayush Stephen Toppo (ayush@prsindia.org)
Comments invited on draft amendments
to the Electricity Act, 2003
The Ministry of Power has invited comments on
the draft Electricity (Amendment) Bill, 2025.14
The Bill seeks to amend the Electricity Act,
4
Monthly Policy Review – October 2025 PRS Legislative Research
Agriculture Table 1: MSP for Rabi crops for 2026-27
Crops 2025-26 2026-27 % change
Vaishali Dhariwal (vaishali@prsindia.org)
Wheat 2,425 2,585 6.6%
Cabinet approves Mission to boost Gram 5,650 5,875 4%
domestic production of pulses Lentil 6,700 7,000 4.5%
(Masur)
The Union Cabinet approved a Mission to boost
Rapeseed 5,950 6,200 4.2%
domestic production and achieve self-sufficiency
Mustard
in pulses.16 The Mission will be implemented
over a six-year period, from 2025-26 to 2030-31, Safflower 5,940 6,540 10.1%
with a financial outlay of Rs 11,440 crore. Key Sources: Cabinet Committee on Economic Affairs, October
1, 2025, PRS.
features of the scheme are as follows:
▪ Distribution of seeds: The Mission aims to Cabinet approves subsidy rates on
develop and promote high-yielding, pest- Phosphatic and Potassic fertilisers
resistant, and climate-resilient varieties of
pulses. By 2030-31, it targets: (i) The Union Cabinet approved subsidy rates for
distribution of 126 lakh quintals of certified phosphatic and potassic fertilisers for the Rabi
seeds to farmers, (ii) expansion of the area season 2025-26 (October 2025 to March 2026).18
under pulses cultivation to 310 lakh The budgetary outlay for the subsidy is
hectares, (iii) achieving production of 350 estimated to be around Rs 37,952 crore.
lakh tonnes, and (iv) an improvement in
yield to 1,130 kg per hectare. To support
these goals, 88 lakh seed kits will be
distributed free of cost to farmers. States Labour
will prepare five-year rolling seed
production plans. Vaishali Dhariwal (vaishali@prsindia.org)
▪ Post harvest infrastructure: The Mission
Draft National Labour and Employment
seeks to strengthen post-harvest
Policy released for public consultation
infrastructure by establishing 1,000
processing units. A subsidy of up to Rs 25
The Ministry of Labour and Employment
lakh will be provided for setting up
released the draft National Labour and
processing and packaging units. Employment Policy for public consultation.19
▪ Assured procurement: The Mission The Policy aims to increase female labour force
provides for assured procurement of Tur, participation and achieve near zero workplace
Urad, and Masoor under the Price Support fatalities. The policy outlines seven objectives:
Scheme, which aims to ensure stable prices (i) universal and portable social security, (ii)
for farmers. The National Agricultural occupational safety and health, (iii) employment
Cooperative Marketing Federation of India and future readiness, (iv) women and youth
and the National Cooperative Consumers’ empowerment, (v) ease of compliance and
Federation of India will carry out 100% formalisation, (vi) technology and green
procurement in participating states for the transition, and (vii) convergence and good
next four years from registered farmers. governance. It also positions the National
Career Service as Digital Public Infrastructure
for employment through job matching and
Cabinet approves support prices for Rabi
credential verification.
crops for marketing season 2026-27
Major initiatives proposed include: (i) creation
The Union Cabinet approved the minimum
of a Universal Social Security Account
support prices (MSP) for rabi crops for the
integrating EPFO, Employees State Insurance
marketing season 2026-27.17 MSP refers to the
Corporation, and e-SHRAM databases, (ii) risk-
assured price at which the central government
based inspections under the Occupational Safety
procures crops from farmers. Wheat saw an
and Health Code, 2020, (iii) convergence of
increase of 6.6% and gram of 4%. MSP for
Skill India, National Apprenticeship Promotion
safflower saw the largest increase of 10% over
Scheme, and Pradhan Mantri Kaushal Vikas
2025-26 prices.
Yojana into a single skill-employment
continuum, and (iv) expansion of childcare,
entrepreneurship, and flexible work measures to
increase women’s labour force participation to
35% by 2030. The policy also aims to ease
compliance through a single-window digital
5
Monthly Policy Review – October 2025 PRS Legislative Research
compliance system and promote integration of Information Technology (Intermediary
AI into monitoring and governance capabilities. Guidelines and Digital Media Ethics Code)
Amendment Rules, 2025.23 These seek to
The policy will be implemented in three phases
amend the IT Rules, 2021.22 The draft Rules
(2025–27, 2027–30, post-2030) through a three-
introduce obligations for online intermediaries
tier structure. This will comprise: (i) the
and users with regard to synthetically generated
National Labour and Employment Policy
information. Synthetically generated
Implementation Council at the Union level, (ii)
information has been defined as any information
the State Labour Missions, and (iii) District
that is artificially or algorithmically created,
Labour and Employment Resource Centres.
generated, modified or altered using a computer
resource, in a manner that such information
reasonably appears to be authentic. Key changes
proposed include:
Communications
▪ Labelling requirements: Platforms that
Ayush Stephen Toppo (ayush@prsindia.org)
enable creation or modification of
synthetically generated information must
IT Rules on issuance of content removal ensure labelling and permanent unique
identifier for such information. The label
orders amended
must be visibly displayed covering at least
The Ministry of Electronics and Information ten percent of surface area of the display. In
Technology has notified the Information case of audio content, the identifier must be
Technology (Intermediary Guidelines and during the initial ten percent of the duration
Digital Media Ethics Code) Amendment Rules, of the audio. The intermediary should not
2025.20,21 These amend the IT Rules, 2021.22 enable modification, suppression or removal
The 2021 Rules lay down the process through of such label.
which online intermediaries, such as social
▪ User declaration for synthetically
media platforms, may be directed to remove or
generated information and verification:
restrict access to content. Key features of the
A significant social media intermediary
amendments include:
must: (i) require users to declare whether the
▪ Senior-level authorisation for content information they upload is synthetically
removal: Under the 2021 Rules, an generated, (ii) deploy reasonable measures
intermediary is required to disable access to to verify such declarations with regard to the
any information stored, hosted or published nature, format, and source of the
in their platform upon receiving: (i) a court information, and (iii) ensure that any
order or (ii) a direction by central or state confirmed synthetically generated content
government or its agencies. The 2025 Rules carries a prominent label.
adds that these directions will only be issued
Comments are invited until November 6, 2025.
by a senior officer not below the rank of
joint secretary or equivalent, or where such
rank is not appointed, a director or an officer
of equivalent rank. In case of police
authorities, only an officer of the rank of Sports
DIG or above will issue such directions.
Vaishali Dhariwal (vaishali@prsindia.org)
▪ Reasoned order: The amendments add that
each direction for removal must specify the
Comments invited on draft Rules under
legal basis of the direction, nature of
the National Sports Governance Act, 2025
unlawful act, and the precise location (such
as URL) of the content to be removed. The Ministry of Sports and Youth Affairs has
released three set of draft Rules under the
▪ Periodic review: The 2025 Rules also add
National Sports Governance Act, 2025, for
that such directions will be subject to a
public feedback.24 These relate to: (i)
monthly review by an officer of the rank of
appointment of members to the National Sports
Secretary or above to the central or the state
Board, (ii) constitution of National Sports
government.
Bodies and their elections, and (iii) appointments
to the National Sports Tribunal.25,26,27 Key
Comments invited on draft amendments
features of these draft Rules include:
to IT rules on synthetically generated
information ▪ National Sports Board: The Act
establishes a National Sports Board. The
The Ministry of Electronics and Information Board will grant recognition to the national
Technology has invited comments on the draft
6
Monthly Policy Review – October 2025 PRS Legislative Research
sports bodies and register their affiliate bidder’s bank guarantee will be appropriated for
units. The draft Rules specify that the each month of delay.
Board will comprise a chairperson and two
other members, appointed by the central
government. A search-cum-selection
committee will be constituted to recommend Industry
these appointments, headed by the Cabinet
Secretary. Board members will hold office Ayush Stephen Toppo (ayush@prsindia.org)
for three years, and will be eligible for
reappointment for one more term, subject to PLI scheme for textiles amended
the age limit.
The Ministry of Textiles has notified
▪ National Sports Bodies: General body of amendments to the Production Linked Incentive
all sports bodies will have at least four (PLI) Scheme for textiles.31,32 The scheme was
sportspersons of outstanding merit. The launched in 2021.33 It aims to increase domestic
sports bodies will compile a list of male and production of certain products such as Man-
female sportspersons before elections. Made Fibre (MMF) apparel, MMF fabrics, and
Elections to the Executive Committee will technical textile products. Key changes include:
be conducted through secret ballot.
▪ Reduction in investment threshold:
Electoral officers will be drawn from the
Earlier, the scheme required a minimum
National Sports Election Panel constituted
investment of Rs 300 crore and Rs 100 crore
by the central government.
from manufacturers for part one (large
▪ National Sports Tribunal: The Act projects) and part two (medium-scale
establishes a National Sports Tribunal to projects) of the scheme, respectively. The
adjudicate sports-related disputes. The draft amendments reduce the thresholds to Rs 150
Rules specify that the Chairperson will hold crore and Rs 50 crore, respectively.
office for four years, or until turning 70
▪ Lower turnover criteria: To qualify for
years old. Members will hold office for four
incentives, manufacturers were previously
years or until turning 67 years old. All
required to record a minimum 25% increase
members will be eligible for reappointment
in the turnover over the previous year. The
for one more term, subject to the age limit.
amendments reduce this criterion to 10%
Comments are invited until November 14, 2025. from the financial year 2025–26 (applicable
from the second year onwards).
▪ Expansion of eligible product categories:
The amendments expand eligible product
Mining
categories to include eight new categories
under the MMF apparel and nine under the
Vaishali Dhariwal (vaishali@prsindia.org)
MMF fabrics.
Intermediary timelines specified for ▪ Relaxation in company registration
execution of mining lease requirements: Earlier, applicants were
required to set up new companies before the
The Ministry of Mines has notified amendments
commencement of investment. The
to the Mineral (Auction) Rules, 2015. These
amendments remove this requirement and
Rules have been issued under the Mines and
allow applicants to establish project units
Minerals (Development and Regulation) Act,
within existing companies.
1957.28,29,30 The 2015 Rules prescribe a
timeframe of three years (extendable by two
years) for executing a mining lease from the date
of issuance of a letter of intent (LoI). The 2025
Rules add following intermediary timelines: (i) Environment
approval of the mining plan within six months
Vaishali Dhariwal (vaishali@prsindia.org)
from the issuance of LoI, (ii) provision of
environment clearance within 18 months of the
Emission intensity targets released for
approval of the mining plan, and (iii) execution
of the mining lease within 12 months of the certain industries
issuance of environment clearance. For
The Ministry of Environment, Forest and
composite licences, execution will be required
Climate Change issued Greenhouse Gases
within 12 months of issuance of LoI. A specified
Emission Intensity Target (GEI) Rules, 2025,
level of processing must be completed within 36
under the Environment (Protection) Act,
months post execution. An amount of 1% of the
1986.34,35 These Rules specify greenhouse gases
7
Monthly Policy Review – October 2025 PRS Legislative Research
emission intensity targets for industries in four An officer of the Ministry, equivalent to the rank
sectors: (i) aluminium, (ii) cement, (iii) chemical of a joint secretary, will serve as a member
processing, and (iv) pulp and paper. The Rules secretary to the Board. The Board will meet at
will facilitate compliance under the Carbon least once in three months as determined by the
Credit Trading Scheme, 2023.36 The scheme chairman or the member secretary. It will also
provides a market-based mechanism to regulate have the power to constitute working groups of
and trade carbon credits. professional experts to advise it on its functions.
The Rules specify obligated companies and
respective target years for compliance. The
obligated companies must register under the
Indian Carbon Market Framework. Companies Annexure
will earn carbon credit certificates for achieving
emission intensity levels below the set targets. Parliament has constituted some of its
They may use previously banked and purchased Departmentally Related Standing Committees.
carbon credit certificates to meet the shortfall if The subjects identified for examination for 2025-
they are unable to meet these targets. The 26 by the Committees are given below.
Central Pollution Control Board may impose
environmental compensation on any company Chemicals and Fertilisers
failing to comply with these Rules. This
Department of Fertilisers
compensation will be equal to twice the average
1 Evaluation of the Direct Benefit Transfer
price of carbon credit certificates traded in the
(DBT) Scheme
respective compliance year. This compensation
2 Review of the Non-performing Assets/
must be paid within 90 days of its imposition.
Immovable properties lying idle in the
Fertiliser Public Sector Undertakings
(PSUs).
3 Evaluation and monitoring of Fertiliser Subsidy
Transport
Schemes as well as Fertiliser Innovation
Schemes’
Atri Prasad Rout (atri@prsindia.org)
4 Evaluation of performance of PSUs producing
fertiliser (other than Business and Commercial
Rules regarding constitution of the aspects)
National Road Safety Board notified 5 Initiatives for ensuring growth of domestic
fertiliser industry.
The Ministry of Road Transport and Highways
6 Fertiliser Projects and joint ventures for
issued the National Road Safety Board Rules,
ensuring availability of fertilisers and raw
2025 under the Motor Vehicles Act, 1988.37,38
materials.
The Act provides that the Board will advise the
7 Evaluation of Implementation of Fertilisers
central and state governments on issues related
(Movement Control) Order, 1973 with special
to road safety such as: (i) standards of design, reference to effectiveness of levy of penalties
construction and maintenance of motor vehicles, for violation of the Order
and (ii) standards related to road safety, road 8 Development, Promotion and Growth in the
infrastructure and traffic control. The Rules area of Nano Fertilisers including spray
specify the organisational composition of the application mechanisms
Board and related procedures. 9 Reform of Urea Policy and need for nutrient-
based pricing for all fertilisers
The Board will consist of: (i) a chairman as
10 Alignment of logistics for efficient fertiliser
appointed by the central government with at
movement and availability at affordable prices
least 15 years of experience in fields such as
during peak season and steps taken to curb
highway engineering and road safety, (ii) six forced Bundling of unnecessary boosters with
members from state governments and union essential fertilisers
territory administrations, (iii) two members 11 Promotion of Organic and Bio fertilisers
representing Ministry of Road Transport and
Department of Chemicals and Petrochemical
Highways, (iv) two members from the National
1 To establish India as a leading manufacturer
Highways Authority of India, (v) one member
of chemicals and petrochemicals by initiating
from the National Highways and Infrastructure
measures including, inter-alia, revival of sick
Development Corporation, and (vi) at least five
units
more members with relevant experience as
2 Review of the functioning of Central Institute
appointed by the central government. The
of Petrochemicals Engineering & Technology
chairman will have a term of three years, while
(CIPET), technical support services to plastic
members representing states will serve for two industry by CIPET including R&D initiatives by
years on a rotation basis. CIPET for the Plastic Industry
8
Monthly Policy Review – October 2025 PRS Legislative Research
3 Factors impacting Dye-stuffs and dye Ministry of Electronics and Information Technology
intermediates industry
1 Impact of emergence of Artificial Intelligence
4 Review of the functioning of Institute of and related issues
Pesticide Formulation Technology (IPFT) 2 Social and digital platforms and their
5 Setting up of Plastic Waste Management regulation
Centres and steps taken to minimize the use 3 Cyber Security- Issues, Challenges and way
of Plastic in the country forward
6 Review of performance of Petroleum, 4 Biometric data and technologies: current and
Chemicals and Petrochemical Investment future uses
Regions (PCPIRs).
5 Role of Digital Governance in Public Service
7 Review of National Policy on Petrochemicals, Delivery
2007 Ministry of Communications (Department of
8 Addressing Quality challenges in the Indian Posts)
Chemical Industry
1 E-commerce logistics and supply chain
9 Need for an effective policy for minimizing management in Postal Services
residue from Insecticides and Pesticides
2 Adoption of global best practices and the role
formulation
of Universal Postal Union (UPU) in
Department of Pharmaceuticals strengthening India Post
1 Self-sufficiency in production and availability 3 Review of services offered by the Department
of Active Pharmaceutical Ingredients (API) of Posts- Challenges and Opportunities
through various initiatives including Production 4 Status of Digital Infrastructure in India Post
Linked Incentive Scheme (PLI)
Ministry of Communications (Department of
2 Establishing uninterrupted growth of the Telecommunications)
Pharmaceutical Industry while ensuring quality
1 Issues confronting Telecom Sector in India
and safety standards
3 Review of Pradhan Mantri Bhartiya 2 Self-Reliance in Telecom Manufacturing
Janaushadi Pariyojna (PMBJP) with specific Sector
reference to penetration of PMBJP in North- 3 Quality of Service (QoS) Standards and
East states Consumer Protection in Telecom Sector
4 Construction of Campuses of National Institute 4 Review of the performance of
of Pharmaceuticals Education and Research schemes/projects under Digital Bharat Nidhi
(NIPER) and Evaluation of performance of (DBN) implemented by Public and Private
NIPERs Sector
5 Review of Role, functions and duties of 5 Spectrum Management and its Role in Digital
National Pharmaceutical Pricing Authority Growth
(NPPA) with specific reference to increase in Coal, Mines and Steel
prices of medicines in the country
Ministry of Coal
6 Setting up of National guidelines for Reuse of
Single-Use Medical Devices 1 Role of Coal and Lignite Companies towards
7 Generic versus branded medicines with Aatmanirbhar Bharat
special reference to awareness and trust 2 Review of functioning of Coal India Limited
deficit (CIL) and its subsidiaries
8 Need for an integrated, transparent and 3 Review of functioning of Coal Controller’s
predictable/reliable drug pricing mechanism Organisation (CCO)
9 Inclusive growth of the Pharmaceutical 4 Review of functioning of Coal Mines Provident
Industry Fund Organisation (CMPFO)
Communications and Information 5 Conservation Safety and Infrastructure
Technology Development in Coal Mines
6 Coal Gasification Scheme
Ministry of Information and Broadcasting
7 Infrastructure development to augment
1 Review of implementation of Laws related to
washed coal production
all forms of Media
8 Coal Block Auction & Allocation process – A
2 Review of functioning of Prasar Bharati
Review
Organization
9 Land Acquisition and issues of Rehabilitation
3 Overview of Film Industry
& Resettlement in Coal/Lignite Mining Areas
4 Emergence of OTT Platforms and related
10 Research and Development in Coal Sector
issues
11 Future of Coal in India's Energy Mix
5 Review of functioning of Central Bureau of
Communication (CBC) 12 Implementation of Information Technology and
6 Review of implementation of “The Information vigilance activities to curb illegal coal mining
Technology (Intermediary Guidelines and and theft of coal in the country
Digital Media Ethics Code) Rules, 2021 (Part 13 Compliance of Environmental Norms by
III)” Coal/Lignite Companies
9
Monthly Policy Review – October 2025 PRS Legislative Research
14 Skill development in Coal/Lignite Sector 13 Green Transition of the Iron and Steel
Sector in India - Roadmap and Action
15 Expediting and Simplifying the Environment
Plan
and Forest Clearance Process for Coal Mining
Projects 14 Major Policy changes assisting
Secondary Steel Sector
16 Coal Mines Closure and Land Use
Management 15 Management of Energy efficiency by
Steel Plants
Ministry of Mines
16 Environmental Issues related to Steel
1 Exploration of Offshore Mining in India –
Plants
Opportunities and challenges
17 Development of Manganese Ore
2 KABIL: India's quest for Global Critical
Industry in India
M inerals
18 Status of Greenfield and Brownfield
3 National Critical Minerals Mission: A step
Projects of Steel PSUs
towards making India Aatmanirbhar
Energy
4 Mineral Exploration and Mining Activities in
North-Eastern States and their developmental Ministry of Power
impact 1 Energy Security in India – Ensuring
5 Measures for Abatement of Pollution due to uninterrupted availability of Energy at an
Mining Activities affordable Price
6 Review of functioning of National Aluminum 2 Energy Transition
Company Limited (NALCO)
3 Energy Conservation and Efficiency
7 Review of functioning of Hindustan Copper
4 Performance of Thermal (Coal and Gas
Limited (HCL)
based) Power Plants - Ensuring
8 Review of functioning of Geological Survey of
availability of sufficient quantity of Fuel
India (GSI)
5 Revival of Hydro Power Sector in the
9 Review of functioning of Indian Bureau of
Country
Mines (IBM)
6 Revamping of the Transmission Sector -
10 National Mineral Exploration Trust (NMET) –
Strengthening of the Infrastructure and
Performance and Review
Management of High Demand in the
11 Measures to curb Illegal Mining of Minerals Power System
and Metals in the Country
7 Strengthening of the Electricity
12 Safety, Health and Education facilities for Distribution Sector - Revamped
inhabitants/workers in mining areas Distribution Sector Scheme with special
13 Implementation of Information Technology (IT) focus on Aggregate Technical and
and Artificial Intelligence (AI) in Mining Sector Commercial (AT&C) Losses and Smart
Ministry of Steel Metering
8 Ensuring Disaster Preparedness and
1 Aatmanirbharta in Steel Sector and
Response in the Power Sector
Roadmap for ‘Made in India’ Steel
production 9 Go Electric - Facilitating Electric Mobility
and Development of Charging
2 Organizational structure and
Infrastructure for Electric Vehicles
Performance of Steel Authority of India
Ltd. (SAIL) – A Review 10 Impact of AI and Action Plan for ensuring
Cyber Security in the Power Sector
3 Review of functioning of Rashtriya Ispat
Nigam Limited (RINL) 11 Carbon Footprints of Power Sector in
India and Action Plan for Carbon Credit
4 Review of functioning of NMDC Steel
Trading Scheme
Ltd. (NSL)
12 Role of Power Sector Statutory Bodies,
5 Review of functioning of National Mineral
PSUs and Institutions in development of
Development Corporation (NMDC)
atmanirbhar Power Sector
6 Review of functioning of KIOCL
13 Emerging Scenario in the Power Sector
7 Review of functioning of MOIL and Need for a New Electricity Policy –
8 Review of functioning of MECON and its An Appraisal
consultancy activities 14 Action Plan for Development of Pump
9 PLI (Production Linked Incentive) Storage Plants and Battery Energy
Scheme for Steel Sector Storage Systems
10 Promotion of R&D in Iron and Steel Ministry of New and Renewable Energy
Sector 1 India’s Renewable Energy Targets by
11 Review of ‘Promotion of Flagging of 2030 and beyond
Merchant Ships in India’ Scheme under 2 Performance of India’s Solar Energy
the Ministry of Steel Sector
12 Iron ore handling infrastructure in India 3 Evaluation of Wind Energy Sector in the
Country
10
Monthly Policy Review – October 2025 PRS Legislative Research
4 Pradhan Mantri Kisan Urja Suraksha 16 India and the Global South- Towards an
Evam Utthaan Mahabhiyaan (PM- inclusive and equitable world order
KUSUM) - An Evaluation 17 Recent developments in India-Pakistan
5 PM Surya Ghar Muft Bijli Yojana - Grid relations
connected Solar Rooftop Initiative 18 India’s Cultural Diplomacy and soft
6 National Green Hydrogen Mission - Role power
of Green Hydrogen in achieving Energy 19 India -Nepal bilateral ties
Independence for India
20 Strengthening India’s ties with Latin
7 Ensuring Round-the-Clock-Power (RTC)
American Countries
from Renewable Energy Projects
21 India’s Look East Policy: Review of India
8 National Bioenergy Programme - An
– ASEAN Partnership
Evaluation
22 Opportunities in African Countries and
9 Green Energy Corridor - Development of
India’s Engagement
Evacuation and Transmission
23 Schemes/programmes related to
Infrastructure for Renewable Energy
Overseas Indians- A Review
10 Self-Reliance in Renewable Energy
Sector - Production Linked Incentive
Finance
(PLI) Scheme for National Programme 1 Performance Review of International
on High Efficiency Solar PV Modules Financial Services Centre (IFSC)- GIFT
11 Renewable Energy Financing - Sound City and Way Forward
and Innovative Financing as the key to 2 Review of Functioning of Aspirational
accelerated Growth in Renewable District Programmes and Aspirational
Energy Sector Block Programmes of NITI Aayog
12 New Technologies in Renewable Energy 3 Way forward for Enhancing Ease of
Sector - Progress in Offshore Wind, Geo Doing Business Parameters in India
Thermal and Ocean Energy 4 Banking and Economic Progress:
13 Research and Technology Development Navigating Challenges and Embracing
in Renewable Energy Sector the Future
14 Skill Development and Capacity Building 5 Insurance Sector: Impact, Challenges
in Renewable Energy Sector and Opportunities
External Affairs 6 Indirect Tax Reforms: Simplification,
Rationalisation and Ease of Compliance
1 Future of India-Bangladesh Relationship
with Special Emphasis on GST
2 India’s Role and Presence in the Arctic
7 National Company Law Tribunal (NCLT):
and Antarctic Regions
Challenges and Way Forward
3 India Europe Relationship: Opportunities
8 Monitoring and Appraisal of Central
and Challenges
Sector Projects of Rs. 150 crore and
4 India-Sri Lanka Relations and the Way above and Accountability for Time and
Ahead Cost Overruns
5 Role of QUAD 9 Review of Survey of Public Enterprises
6 Understanding India-China Relations and Way Forward
and the way forward 10 Review and Evaluation of Mechanism of
7 Looking West: India's Relations with Memorandum of Understanding for
West Asia including Israel Central Public Sector Enterprises
(CPSEs)
8 India’s Role in Global Tech diplomacy,
Digital governance, Outer Space 11 Performance Review of Investor
diplomacy, AI and emerging innovations Education and Protection Fund Authority
(IEPFA)
9 India-US Relations: Challenges,
Opportunities and the Way Forward 12 Review of Corporate Social
Responsibility
10 India’s Role in Global Governance
Institutions including reforms in UNSC 13 Performance Review of National
Housing Bank (NHB) and its role in
11 India’s Role in BRICS
Strengthening Affordable Housing
12 India’s trade diplomacy and geopolitics Finance and Enhancing Credit
13 Functioning of Indian Missions Abroad: Accessibility in the Housing Sector
An Assessment and Evaluation including 14 Evaluation of Centrally Sponsored
functioning of Indian Foreign service Schemes/ Programmes: Budget
14 Performance of Passport Issuance Allocation and Fund Flow
System including Issuance of e- 15 Review of the Regulation and
Passports and Review of the Indian Supervision of Payment and Settlement
Passport Act and Rules Systems
15 Facilitating cooperation and collaboration 16 Artificial Intelligence in Finance:
with States and Union Territories Emerging Issues and Prospects
11
Monthly Policy Review – October 2025 PRS Legislative Research
17 Climate Resilient Finance in India: 7 Review of Affordable Rental Housing
Challenges and Opportunities Schemes of MoHUA
18 Performance Review of SIDBI in 8 Review of Slums Redevelopment and
financing and strengthening the MSME Resettlement initiatives of MoHUA
Sector and the start-up ecosystem 9 Review of progress of various schemes
19 Performance Review of NABARD in and programmes of the Ministry i.e.
empowering and providing credit to the Swachh Bharat Mission (Urban),
agriculture and rural sector Pradhan Mantri Awas Yojana (Urban),
20 Non-Banking Financial Companies Atal Mission for Rejuvenation and Urban
(NBFCs): Performance Review, Transformation (AMRUT), Urban
Regulatory Gaps and Way Forward Challenge Fund (UCF), PM Street
Vendor’s Atma Nirbhar Nidhi (PM
21 Enhancing Financial Literacy and
SVANidhi), National Urban Livelihood
Financial Digitalisation: Challenges and
Mission (DAY-NULM), National Urban
Achievements
Digital Mission (NUDM), Regional Rapid
22 Functioning of Grievances Redressal
Transit System (RRTS) etc
Mechanism in Financial Sector
10 Sustainable urban development of
23 Review of working of Insolvency and
heritage cities and cities of religious
Bankruptcy Code and Emerging Issues
importance
24 Performance review of National
11 Improving the standard and quality of
Statistical Commission (NSC)
living in urban cities with focus on Metro
25 Direct Tax Reforms: Simplification, cities
Rationalisation and Ease of Compliance
12 Review of need and progress of Metro in
26 Social Security for Informal Sector various cities
27 Review of long-term public finances and 13 GIS-Based Master Planning and the
debt at Centre and States Role and Functioning of the Town and
28 Performance Evaluation of SEBI: Capital Country Planning 2 Organisation (TCPO)
Market Regulation and Ensuring Investor 14 Public–Private Partnership (PPP) Model
Protection in Urban Development: Effectiveness,
29 Monetization of Public Sector Assets Challenges and Future Outlook
including Disinvestment and Asset 15 Strengthening Urban Governance:
Recycling Assessment of Human Resource
30 RBI’s Evolving Role in India’s Dynamic capacity in Urban Local Bodies
Economy 16 Revenue Mobilization and Budget
31 Review of Members of Parliament Local Management in Urban Local Bodies
Area Development Scheme (MPLADS) 17 Environmentally sustainable techniques
in light of revised guidelines in urban planning and initiatives for
32 A Study on Virtual Digital Assets (VDAs) developing eco- friendly cities with zero
and Way Forward carbon emissions
33 Evaluating Financing of Union Territories 18 Regularization of Unauthorized Colonies
for Increasing Efficiency in Delhi and other cities
34 Reviewing Role and Scope of Ministry of 19 Redevelopment of General Pool
Planning (NITI Aayog) Residential Accommodation (GPRA)
colonies and measures for augmentation
35 Performance Review and Regulation of
of Government residential quarters
Pension Sector
20 Status of Implementation of land pooling
Housing and Urban Affairs
policy in Delhi
1 Census criteria for defining urban areas
21 Review of functioning of Housing and
2 PM-eBus Sewa Scheme Urban Development Corporation
(HUDCO), Hindustan Prefab Limited
3 Review of Implementation of Real Estate
(HPL), Delhi Development Authority
(Regulation and Development) Act, 2016
(DDA), Central Public Works Department
4 Review of Atal Mission for Rejuvenation
(CPWD), National Buildings Construction
and Urban Transformation (AMRUT)
Corporation (NBCC), Directorate of
with special emphasis on Urban Drinking
Estates (DoE), Land and Development
Water
Office (L&DO), National Capital Region
5 Review of Sewerage and Septage Planning Board (NCRPB), Delhi Urban
Coverage in Cities with special reference Arts Commission (DUAC), National
to interventions under Atal Mission for Capital Region Transport Corporation
Rejuvenation and Urban Transformation (NCRTC), and Indian National Trust for
(AMRUT & AMRUT 2.0) Art and Cultural Heritage (INTACH)
6 Operation and Performance of Smart 22 Allotment of Government land in Delhi
City Integrated Command and Control
23 Strategies to address traffic congestion
Centres (ICCCs) in E-Governance
through smart traffic management
systems in Cities
12
Monthly Policy Review – October 2025 PRS Legislative Research
Industry Ministry of Rural Development (Department of
Land Resources)
Ministry of Micro, Small and Medium
Enterprises 1 Implementation of the Land Acquisition
Act, 2013
1 Review of Credit Access and Financial
Empowerment Mechanisms for MSMEs. 2 Review the status of Wasteland
Development and Land Use Change
2 Export Competitiveness and Global
Market Integration of MSMEs. 3 Reviewing effective management of
Common Property Resources & Grazing
3 Support Mechanisms for Traditional and
Lands
Labour-Intensive MSME Sector
4 Impact of Mining & Industrial Corridors
4 Impact of US Tariffs on MSME Sector
on Rural Habitation and Land
5 Implementation of 25% prescribed
5 Review the status of Watershed
procurement from MSEs by CPSEs
Development & Soil Conservation under
under the Public Procurement Policy and
Watershed Development Component of
Review of release of their payment
Pradhan Mantri Krishi Sinchayee Yojana
Ministry of Heavy Industries (WDC-PMKSY)
1 India’s Transition to Electric Mobility: 6 Implementation of Digital India Land
Challenges and Opportunities Records Modernization Programme
(DILRMP)
2 Revival and Modernization Strategies for
CPSEs under the Ministry of Heavy Ministry of Panchayati Raj
Industries
1 Review of Panchayat Extension to
3 Competitiveness and Industry 4.0 Scheduled Areas (PESA) Act, 1996
Integration in the Capital Goods Sector.
2 Fiscal Empowerment of Panchayats
3 Strengthening the role of Panchayati Raj
Rural Development and Panchayati Raj
Institutions (PRIs) in Disaster
Ministry of Rural Development (Department of Management & Climate Response
Rural Development) 4 Review of performance of Women &
1 Rural Skilling and Migration: Impact Youth Leadership in Panchayats
Study of Deen Dayal Upadhyaya 5 Review the implementation of Nine
Grameen Kaushalya Yojana (DDU- themes in realization of Sustainable
GKY), Deendayal Antyodaya Yojna- Development Goals (SDGs) through
National Rural Livelihoods Mission Panchayats
(DAY-NRLM), and Rural Self
6 Effectiveness of the implementation of
Employment Training Institutes (RSETIs)
Constitution 73rd Amendment Act with
2 Role of Banks in Rural Development special reference to coordination in
3 Review the functioning of Mission three-tier system of Panchayat
Antyodaya to strengthen Rural Health 7 Digital Empowerment of Rural India:
and Nutrition Infrastructure Examination and Review of Common
4 Scope of Livelihood Diversification in Service Centre (CSC) and BharatNet
Rural Areas under National Rural Programme and Mobile connectivity
Livelihoods Mission (NRLM) 8 Survey of Villages Abadi and Mapping
5 Review of Autonomous Bodies under with Improvised Technology in Village
MoRD: National Rural Infrastructure Areas (SVAMITVA) scheme.
Development Agency (NRIDA), National Consumer Affairs, Food and Public
Rural Livelihood Promotion Society Distribution
(NRLPS), National Institute of Rural
Ministry of Consumer Affairs, Food & Public
Development and Panchayati Raj
Distribution (Department of Consumer Affairs)
(NIRDPR) and Bharat Rural Livelihood
1 Dark Patterns and Manipulative Online
Foundation (BRLF) etc.
Practices: Challenges and remedial
6 Review of the Progress made under
measures
Pradhan Mantri Gram Sadak Yojana
2 Improving Quality Control and
(PMGSY)
Enforcement of BIS Standards
7 Review of Rural Employment through
3 Quality Assurance and Standardisation
the Mahatma Gandhi National Rural
of Ethanol and Bio-Fuels
Employment Guarantee Act
(MGNREGA) 4 Modernising the National Test House:
Expanding Advanced Testing
8 Review the Status of Pradhan Mantri
Capabilities
Awaas Yojana – Gramin (PMAY-G)
5 Ensuring Availability of Essential
Commodities with specific Reference to
Petroleum and Petroleum Products
6 Regulation of Packaged Commodities
with specific Reference to Sugar Content
13
Monthly Policy Review – October 2025 PRS Legislative Research
in Baby products and other Food 7 Identification and Rehabilitation of
Products Bonded Labour
7 Safeguarding consumer rights in banking 8 Implementation of prescribed minimum
sector Wages in various Employment Sectors.
8 Regulation and Supply of Textile 9 Social Security and Welfare Measures to
Products under Essential Commodities provide old age protection to
Act, 1955 Unorganised/ Informal Sector Workers
9 Strengthening Consumer Rights under including Gig/Scheme workers, Street
the New GST 2.0 Reforms Vendors, Stone Crushers, Fishermen
10 National, State, and District Consumer and Workers in IT and
Grievance Redressal Commissions: An Telecommunication Sectors
assessment 10 Safeguards and measures for protecting
11 Promoting consumer awareness and the interest of overseas contract workers
transparency through effective product and the Returnees, particularly in the
labelling Middle East Region.
11 Employment Generation Programmes -
Ministry of Consumer Affairs, Food & Public
A Review
Distribution (Department of Food and Public
Distribution) 12 Empowerment of Women Workforce –
An insight into their working conditions
1 Predictive Analytics for Optimizing
and implementation of various provisions
Foodgrains Procurement
available to them
2 Storage of foodgrains: Existing
13 India and International Labour
infrastructure and future strategy
Organisation (ILO) - Achieving objectives
3 Transportation of foodgrains: Optimizing
and review of conventions binding on
movement
India
4 Modernisation of Public Distribution
14 Expanding and providing affordable
System: Strengthening Technical
health care facilities to the workers and
Database
their families in the organised and
5 Technological advancements in sugar unorganised sectors through ESIC with
industry reference to rural and underserved areas
6 Central Warehousing Corporation – challenges and resolution
(CWC): Diversification of services 15 Social security measures to ensure
7 Edible Oil Industry: A Review welfare of workers in Railways,
Roadways, Airlines and Ports
8 Quality Control Cells (QCCs)
16 Impact of Technology and Automation
9 Indian Grain Storage Management &
on Jobs and Worker Welfare.
Research Institute (IGMRI):
Strengthening Post Harvest 17 Rights and Welfare of Domestic Workers
Management and quality of food grain 18 Assessment of Working Conditions and
Labour, Textiles and Skill Development Rights of Migrant Workers in India
19 Policy Support for promoting
Ministry of Labour and Employment
employment in labour- intensive sectors
1 Implementation of the Labour Codes. 20 Policy Framework and Rehabilitation of
2 Working Conditions and Welfare workers in closed/sick industries
Measures for Mine Workers, including 21 Evaluation of Employee Grievance
Unauthorised Mines and assessment of Redressal Mechanisms and Compliance
working of Directorate General of Mines with Labour Laws
Safety (DGMS). 22 Review and regulation of Labour
3 Contractual Appointments/Deployments Recruitment Agencies
and Implementation of Labour Laws 23 Review of Performance and Integration
concerning the welfare of of e-Shram Portal
Contract/Casual Workers in Government
Ministry of Textiles
Organisations/Public Sector
Undertakings/Public Sector 1 Skill Development vis-à-vis
Banks/Establishments. Manufacturing and Upgradation in
4 Implementation of Welfare measures for Textiles Sector
Plantation Workers 2 Challenges/Opportunities in Indian
5 Functioning of the Employees Provident Textile Industry
Fund Organisation (EPFO) with special 3 Status/Performance of Handloom Sector
reference to operation of the EPF
4 Status and Reforming of Power loom
Pension Scheme and Management of
Sector
Corpus Fund
5 Performance of Marketing Agencies of
6 Functioning of Dattopant Thengadi
Handlooms and Handicrafts
National Board for Workers Education
6 Functioning of National Textile
and Development (DTNBWED).
Corporation (NTC)
14
Monthly Policy Review – October 2025 PRS Legislative Research
7 Challenges/Opportunities in the Wool 13 Skill Upgradation and Language Training
Sector for Migrant Workers Seeking Overseas
8 Scope of Public-Private Sector Employment
Partnership in Textile Sector 14 Evaluation of Skill Development and
9 Review of the functioning of Textile Entrepreneurship Schemes across
Cluster Development Scheme (TCDS) Ministries (PM Vishwakarma, RSETIs,
etc.)
10 Impact of waste emerging from Textile
production on the environment and 15 Review of Government and Private ITIs
measures/initiatives taken to curb it 16 Need for a National Skill Census
11 Review of the functioning of SAMARTH -
Petroleum and Natural Gas
Scheme for Capacity Building in Textile
Sector 1 Pricing of Petroleum Products Including
Review of Pricing Policy
12 Challenges and prospects under North
Eastern Textile Promotion Scheme 2 Marketing and Supply of Petroleum
(NERTPS) with special focus on Products
Sericulture 3 Review of Physical and Financial
13 Measures for promotion of Traditional Performance of Oil Companies
handicrafts and preservation of dying 4 Review of Human Resource Policies of
arts Oil PSUs
14 Implementation of Prime Minister Mega 5 CSR Activities of Oil PSUs
Integrated Textile Region and Apparel
6 Measures for Ensuring Energy Security
(PM MITRA) Scheme
in the Country including Review of
15 Review of the Implementation and Initiatives under ‘Atmanirbhar Bharat’
Functioning of Raw Material Supply and ‘Make in India’
Scheme for the Handloom Sector
7 Efficacy of Domestic LPG Cylinder
16 Evaluation of the Performance of Central Safety Campaigns
Cottage Industries Corporation of India
8 Review of On-Going projects of Oil
Ltd
PSUs.
17 Performance, Modernisation and
9 Customer Service Initiatives and
Rehabilitation of British India Corporation
Grievance Redressal Mechanisms in
Ltd. Post Nationalisation in 1981
Petroleum/Gas Sectors
18 Review of the challenges faced by
10 Examination of R&D Activities of Oil
India’s Technical Textiles Sector and the
PSUs
future roadmap
11 Review of SATAT Scheme and Other
19 Inclusion of Textiles under the One
Initiatives for Promoting Alternate Energy
District One Product (ODOP) Initiative
Sources
Ministry of Skill Development and
12 Environmental Issues in Petroleum
Entrepreneurship
Sector
1 National Skills Qualifications Framework
13 Review of Indradhanush Gas Grid
– An Assessment
Limited Towards Implementing
2 Functioning of National Skill Hydrocarbon Vision 2030 for North-East
Development Corporation (NSDC).
14 Review of Impact of Ethanol Blending in
3 Skill Training in Food Processing, Various Sectors
Agriculture and Allied Sectors
15 Review of LNG Infrastructure in the
4 Recognition of Skills of Agniveers Country
Scheme – An Assessment
16 Examination of International Operations,
5 Introduction of New ITI Upgradation Investments and Overseas Assets of Oil
Scheme PSUs
6 Skill Development under One District 17 Review of PDH-PP Project by GAIL at
One Product (ODOP) Scheme Usar, Maharashtra
7 Functioning of the National Council for 18 Levy of GST on Petroleum Products
Vocational Education and Training
19 Safety and Security in Transportation of
(NCVET)
Petroleum Products
8 Implementation of Pradhan Mantri
Kaushal Vikas Yojana 4.0 (PMKVY 4.0).
20 Role of Private Sector in Petroleum and
Natural Gas Sector
9 National Apprenticeship Promotion
21 Impact of Global Geo-Political Situation
Scheme (NAPS)-2
on Petroleum Sector
10 Jan Shikshan Sansthan (JSS)
22 Review of Domestic Production of
11 Skill Loan Scheme Petroleum Products
12 Scheme of Dual System of Training 23 Measures for Improving Services and
Facilities at Retail Outlets of Oil PSUs.
15
Monthly Policy Review – October 2025 PRS Legislative Research
Social Justice and Empowerment 4 Review of the functioning of the Tribal
Cooperative Marketing Development
Department of Social Justice & Empowerment
Federation of India Limited (TRIFED)
1 Review of functioning of National
5 Schemes/programmes implemented for
Scheduled Castes Finance Development
the welfare of Tribals under Corporate
Corporation (NSFDC)
Social Responsibility (CSR)
2 Scholarship Schemes for SCs, OBCs 6 Review of the implementation of the
and Children of persons engaged in
Scheduled Tribes and other Traditional
hazardous and unclean occupations
Forest Dwellers Act, 2006
including Evaluation studies & their
7 Review of financial assistance provided
implementation
to NGOs/VOs for the socio-economic
3 Economic Empowerment through Skill
development of Tribals including PVTGs
Development Schemes for SCs, OBCs,
8 Review of Skill Development Schemes
DNTs and EBCs
for Tribals including PVTGs
4 Schemes/programmes implemented for
9 Review of Pradhan Mantri Adivasi Nyaya
the welfare of SCs/OBCs under
Maha Abhiyaan (PM-JANMAN)
Corporate Social Responsibility (CSR)
Ministry of Minority Affairs
5 Review of Functioning of National
Backward Classes Finance & 1 Review of Scholarship Schemes for
Development Corporation (NBCFDC) Minority Students
6 Review of the implementation of The 2 Schemes/programmes implemented for
Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes the welfare of Minorities under Corporate
(Prevention of Atrocities) Act 1989 and social responsibility (CSR)
Protection of Civil Rights Act, 1955 3 Review of the Implementation of
7 Review of financial assistance provided Pradhan Mantri Jan Vikas Karyakarm
to NGOs/VOs for the socio-economic (PMJKY)
development of SCs, OBCs, DNTs and 4 Review of Pradhan Mantri Virasat Ka
EBCs Samvardhan (PM VIKAS)
8 Atal Vayo Abhyuday Yojana (AVYAY) 5 Review of Skill Development/Schemes
Department of Empowerment of Persons with for minorities including Seekho Aur
Disabilities Kamao, USTTAD etc
1 Review of functioning of National 6 Review of financial assistance provided
to NGOs/VOs for the socio-economic
Handicapped Finance and Development
welfare of Minorities
Corporation (NHFDC)
2 Review of functioning of National Trust 7 Review of Scholarship Schemes for
Minority Students
for the Welfare of Persons with Autism,
Cerebral Palsy, Mental Retardation and Ministry of Social Justice and Empowerment
Multiple Disabilities (Department of Social Justice and
3 Implementation of Reservation Policy for Empowerment and Department of
Divyangjan Empowerment of Persons with Disabilities),
Ministry of Tribal Affairs and Ministry of
4 Review of Accessible India Campaign
Minority Affairs
5 Review of financial assistance provided
1 Financial inclusion along with Priority
to NGOs/VOs for the socio-economic
Sector Lending by the Financial
development of Divyangjan
Institutions such as Banks/Non-Banking
6 New age Software innovations for Financial Institutions of deprived
empowerment of visually challenged and sections of the society including SCs,
other Divyangjan OBCs, DNTs, EBCs, Divyangjans,
7 Schemes/programmes implemented for Tribals and Minorities in co-ordination
the welfare of Divyangjan under with concerned
Corporate Social Responsibility (CSR) Ministries/Departments/Organizations
8 Review of functioning of Rehabilitation 2 Socio-economic impact of the activities
Council of India of Central Public Sector Enterprises on
9 Review of Skill Development Schemes deprived sections of society including
for Divyangjan SCs, OBCs, DNTs, EBCs, Divyangjan,
Tribals and Minorities in co-ordination
Ministry of Tribal Affairs
with concerned
1 Schemes for Educational and Economic Ministries/Departments/Organizations
empowerment of Tribals
Water Resources
2 Review of functioning of Tribal Research
Department of Water Resources, River
Institutes (TRIs)
Development and Ganga Rejuvenation
3 Review of the functioning of the National
Scheduled Tribes Finance and
1 (i) Conservation, Development,
Management and Abatement of pollution
Development Corporation (NSTFDC)
in river Ganga and its Tributaries under
Namami Gange Programme with
16
Monthly Policy Review – October 2025 PRS Legislative Research
reference to project deliverables and land in the country under various sectors
timelines as well as performance of including Public Private Partnership
State Governments; and (PPP) model on water consumption and
(ii) An overview of the National River pollution control measures
Conservation Plan-Other Basins 8 (i) Water Resources Management in
2 (i) Management of Reservoirs and Water North-Eastern Region of the country with
Bodies, streams, and rivers, including special reference to soil erosion caused
wetland in protected/non-protected forest by Brahmaputra river and its tributaries
areas, National Parks, Tiger Reserves including groundwater recharge and
and Wildlife Sanctuaries impacting pollution control measures in the border
sustainable flora and fauna; and areas adjoining Bhutan and Nepal; and
(ii) Submergence of Islands in inhabited (ii) Restoration of water bodies across
and uninhabited regions of various the Indian Himalayan Region (IHR) and
States including forest areas North- Eastern Region (NER) affected
3 An Overview of the Safety and due to impact of Major and Minor Hydro
Functioning of Dams including small Power Stations, urbanization,
dams with reference to Dam Safety Rule construction, sewerage and other
curves under the Dam Safety anthropogenic activities
Management Act in the background of 9 Review of Major, Medium and Minor
Integrated Reservoir Operation for Flood Irrigation Projects in India including their
Management including automated Status and Progress with regard to (i)
Supervisory Control and Data Participatory Irrigation Management
Acquisition System (SCADA) and (PIM) and (ii) Water Users Associations
effective use of modern digital (WUAs).
technologies – Role of National Dam 10 (i) Contamination/Pollution of Water
Safety Authority (NDSA) Resources: Causes, Consequences and
4 (i) Causes, Impact, Mitigation and Relief Remedial Measures to check ground
Measures for Floods/Cloudburst/ water contamination with particular
Landslides in the Country with special reference to the impact of pesticides and
reference to Inter, Intra-State and Trans- other agricultural practices on water
Border Rivers including protection of sources/ bodies in the country and water
river banks, flood plains along with level rejuvenation measures; and
issues of unregulated occupancy and (ii) Adverse Impact of pollution on sea
encroachment; and water and marine life: Causes,
(ii) Coordination among various Consequences and Remedial Measures
Ministries/Departments including Central 11 Interlinking of Rivers: Significance,
Water Commission (CWC), Indian challenges, and ongoing river interlinking
Meteorological Department (IMD), projects such as Kosi-Mechi and Ken-
National Disaster Management Authority Betwa and other Projects in pipeline
(NDMA), Geological Survey of India
12 Review of Major Canal Irrigation
(GSI), National Disaster Response Force
Projects, with special reference to the
(NDRF) and Dam Authorities in flood
Gandak and Eastern Rajasthan Canal
management with reference to Early
Projects including upgradation of existing
Warning System (EWS) and lesson
canal system in the country
learnt from the recent case studies such
13 Conservation and Restoration of smaller
as floods/cloudburst/landslide in Punjab,
Perennial and Non-Perennial rivers for
Uttarakhand and Himachal Pradesh.
inclusive water planning for sustainable
5 Review of Pradhan Mantri Krishi
development across the country
Sinchayee Yojana (PMKSY) Projects
including measures for de-siltation and
both at State and National levels, and its
improve navigability
role in irrigation efficiency, water
14 Backwater Management, Stagnation and
management, and adoption of modern
Depletion of Cultivable Land in Coastal
technologies such as irrigation through
Regions, including Impacts on
pipes, drip, and sprinkler etc. with
Aquaculture and Fisheries including
special reference to the areas having
pollution of ground water in the region
three crop cultivation practices in a year
15 Review of International Water Treaties
6 Overall review of National Water Mission
and Inter-State Water agreements with
in view of the objectives of the National
Nepal, Bhutan and Bangladesh focusing
Action Plan on Climate Change
on water sharing and flood management
(NAPCC) with special focus on the
National Mission for Sustaining the 16 An overview of the functioning of various
Himalayan Ecosystem (NMSHE), Tribunals/Councils/Boards w.r.t. Inter-
assessing progress, challenges, and State River Water Management in the
effectiveness country
7 Management of Water Resources by the 17 Overall impact of climate change on
Major Organizations and industrial glacier melt, black carbon deposits, and
establishment having large parcels of hydrology in the upper Himalayan
17
Monthly Policy Review – October 2025 PRS Legislative Research
regions, including implications for village and GOBARdhan a waste to
downstream water availability and wealth initiative in the country.
disaster risk 3 Review of the steps taken for providing
18 An overview of the Functioning of World Class Hygiene and Sanitation
Various Organizations/Bodies under the Facilities at Tourist/Pilgrimage Places
Department of Water Resources, River under ‘Green Leaf Rating’, ‘PRASAD
Development and Ganga Rejuvenation Scheme’ and ‘Swachh Iconic Places
19 An overview of the functioning of (SIP)’ and other state level tourist
WAPCOS Limited and NPCC Limited locations
including the role played by various 4 Challenges of Drinking Water Supply in
PSUs, Industries/Corporations under Coastal Areas –Use of Latest
CSR for maintenance, creation, and Technology and Innovation for Setting
enhancement of water bodies and river up of cost-effective Desalination Plants
rejuvenation 5 Solid, Liquid and Plastic Waste
20 Review of Sustainable Flow of Adequate Management under Swachh Bharat
Water for Irrigation and Navigational Mission – Grameen (SBM-G) including
Purposes in Major Rivers and their collection, storage, and disposal.
Tributaries, and Rejuvenation of Inland 6 An overview of the performance of JJM
Waterways and SBM in Aspirational Districts and
21 Review of Atal Bhujal Yojana and other backward districts
Ground Water Management in the 7 Measures to ensure safe Drinking Water
country including recharge measures Availability in Rural India including Arid
such as Rainwater Harvesting and Regions and other Water Stressed
integration with water conservation Areas in the country with reference to
programs role of Canals in providing potable
Department of Drinking Water and Sanitation drinking water
1 Review of performance of Jal Jeevan 8 Role of Government, Local Bodies,
Industries, PSUs, and Corporations
Mission- Quality and functional
under CSR for Creation, Maintenance,
sustainability of piped water supply
and Restoration of Ecosystem through
infrastructure created under Jal Jeevan
Jal Jeevan Mission, Swachh Bharat
Mission (JJM) in rural area,
maintenance, management, and Mission and Other Initiatives
expansion
2 Review of performance of Swachh
Bharat Mission-Phase II with particular
reference to achievement of open
defecation free (ODF)plus target for all
1 Monetary Policy Statement, 2025-26, Resolution of the India, October 24, 2025,
Monetary Policy Committee, September 29 to October 1, https://www.rbi.org.in/Scripts/bs_viewcontent.aspx?Id=4763
2025, Reserve Bank of India, October 1, 2025, 8 Guidelines on Enhancing Credit Supply for Large
https://www.rbi.org.in/Scripts/BS_PressReleaseDisplay.aspx Borrowers through Market Mechanism – Repeal Circular –
?prid=61332. Draft, Reserve Bank of India, October 1, 2025,
2 Consumer Price Index Numbers on Base 2012=100 for https://www.rbi.org.in/Scripts/bs_viewcontent.aspx?Id=4732
Rural, Urban and Combined for the Month of September, 9 Draft – Foreign Exchange Management (Borrowing and
2025, Ministry of Statistics and Programme Implementation, Lending) (Fourth Amendment) Regulations, 2025, Reserve
October 13, 2025, Bank of India, October 2, 2025,
https://www.mospi.gov.in/sites/default/files/press_release/CP https://www.rbi.org.in/Scripts/bs_viewcontent.aspx?Id=4736
I_PR_13oct25L.pdf.
10 Foreign Exchange Management (Borrowing and Lending)
3 Index Numbers of Wholesale Price in India for the Month (Amendment) Regulations, 2025, October 6, 2025,
of September, 2025 (Base Year: 2011-12), Ministry of
https://www.rbi.org.in/Scripts/NotificationUser.aspx?Id=129
Commerce and Industry, October 14, 2025,
15&Mode=0.
https://eaindustry.nic.in/pdf_files/cmonthly.pdf.
11 Consultation Paper on Comprehensive Review of SEBI
4 “Cabinet approves Terms of Reference of 8th Central Pay
(Mutual Funds) Regulations, 1996, Securities and Exchange
Commission”, Press Information Bureau, Ministry of
Board of India, October 28, 2025,
Finance, October 28, 2025,
https://www.sebi.gov.in/reports-and-statistics/reports/oct-
https://www.pib.gov.in/PressReleasePage.aspx?PRID=21832
2025/consultation-paper-on-comprehensive-review-of-sebi-
90.
mutual-funds-regulations-1996-_97496.html.
5 Statement on Developmental and Regulatory Policies,
12 SEBI (Mutual Funds) Regulations, 1996, Securities and
Reserve Bank of India, October 1, 2025,
Exchange Board of India,
https://www.rbi.org.in/Scripts/BS_PressReleaseDisplay.aspx
https://www.sebi.gov.in/acts/mfregu.html.
?prid=61334.
13 Consultation Paper on Enhancing the National Pension
6 Reserve Bank of India (Commercial Banks - Capital
System: Proposals for Flexible, Assured and Predictable
Market Exposure) Directions, 2025 – Draft, Reserve Bank of
Pension Schemes, September 30, 2025,
India, October 24, 2025,
https://pfrda.org.in/en/web/pfrda/w/consultation-paper.
https://www.rbi.org.in/Scripts/bs_viewcontent.aspx?Id=4762
14 Draft Electricity (Amendment) Bill, 2025, Ministry of
7 Reserve Bank of India (Small Finance Banks - Capital
Power, October 9, 2025,
Market Exposure) Directions, 2025 – Draft, Reserve Bank of
https://powermin.gov.in/sites/default/files/webform/notices/S
18
Monthly Policy Review – October 2025 PRS Legislative Research
27 Draft National Sports Governance (National Sports
Tribunal) Rules, Ministry of Youth and Sports Affairs,
eeking_comments_on_Draft_Electricity_Amendment_Bill_2
October 15, 2025, https://yas.gov.in/sports/draft-national-
025.pdf.
sports-governance-national-sports-tribunal-rules-2025-
15 The Electricity Act, 2003, inviting-comments.
https://www.indiacode.nic.in/bitstream/123456789/2058/1/A
28 The Mines and Minerals (Development and Regulation)
2003-36.pdf.
Act, 1957,
16 “Union Cabinet Approves Mission for Aatmanirbharta in https://www.indiacode.nic.in/bitstream/123456789/19380/1/
Pulses for 2025-26 to 2030-31,” Press Information Bureau, mmdr_act%2C1957.pdf.
Cabinet, October 1, 2025,
29 The Mineral (Auction) Second Amendment Rules, 2025,
https://www.pib.gov.in/PressReleasePage.aspx?PRID=21735
The Gazette of India, Ministry of Mines, October 17, 2025,
47.
https://egazette.gov.in/WriteReadData/2025/267001.pdf.
17“Cabinet approves Minimum Support Prices (MSP) for
30 Mineral (Auction) Rules, 2015,
Rabi Crops for Marketing Season 2026-27” Press
https://ibm.gov.in/writereaddata/files/11222021124835Miner
Information Bureau, Cabinet Committee on Economic
al_Auction_Rules_2015%20updated%20upto%2002112021.
Affairs, October 1, 2025,
pdf.
https://www.pib.gov.in/PressReleasePage.aspx?PRID=21735
66. 31 “Ministry of Textiles Notifies Major Amendments in PLI
Scheme for Textiles to Boost MMF and Technical Textiles
18 “Cabinet approves the Nutrient Based Subsidy rates for
Sectors”, Press Information Bureau, Ministry of Textiles,
Rabi 2025- 26 on Phosphatic and Potassic fertilisers” Press
October 9, 2025,
Information Bureau, Cabinet, October 28, 2025,
https://www.pib.gov.in/PressReleasePage.aspx?PRID=21767
https://www.pib.gov.in/PressReleasePage.aspx?PRID=21832
95.
91.
32 Production Linked Incentive (PLI) Scheme for Textiles –
19 Shram Shakti Niti 2025, Ministry of Ministry of Labour
Amendments and Addition in the Scheme, Ministry of
and Employment, October 8, 2025,
Textiles, October 9, 2025,
https://labour.gov.in/sites/default/files/draft_-
https://pli.texmin.gov.in/frontend/images/Documents/Amend
_mole_le_policy_-_v1.1.pdf.
ment%20&%20Addition-PLI%20for%20Textiles%20-
20 The Information Technology (Intermediary Guidelines and %20Noti%20dt%2009.10.2025.pdf.
Digital Media Ethics Code) Amendment Rules, 2025,
33 Production Linked Scheme for Textiles, 2021,
Ministry of Electronics and Information Technology,
https://pli.texmin.gov.in/frontend/images/Documents/1.%20
October 22, 2025,
PLI%20Textiles%20Notification_24.09.2021.pdf.
https://www.meity.gov.in/static/uploads/2025/10/90dedea70a
3fdfe6d58efb55b95b4109.pdf. 34 Notification of the Ministry of Environment, Forest and
Climate Change, October 8, 2025,
21 Government notifies amendments to Rule 3(1)(d) of the IT
https://egazette.gov.in/WriteReadData/2025/266804.pdf.
Rules, 2021 to enhance transparency, accountability and
safeguards, Press Information Bureau, Ministry of 35 Environment Protection Act, 1986,
Electronics and Information Technology, October 23, 2025, https://www.indiacode.nic.in/bitstream/123456789/4316/1/ep
https://www.pib.gov.in/PressReleasePage.aspx?PRID=21817 _act_1986.pdf.
19. 36 Carbon Credit Trading Scheme, 2023, Ministry of Power,
22 The Information Technology (Intermediary Guidelines and June 28, 2023,
Digital Media Ethics Code) Rules, 2021, https://egazette.gov.in/WriteReadData/2023/246859.pdf.
https://www.meity.gov.in/static/uploads/2024/02/Information 37 The Motor Vehicle Act, 1988,
-Technology-Intermediary-Guidelines-and-Digital-Media- https://www.indiacode.nic.in/bitstream/123456789/1798/1/en
Ethics-Code-Rules-2021-updated-06.04.2023-.pdf. g.pdf.
23 The Information Technology (Intermediary Guidelines and 38 National Road Safety Board Rules, 2025, Ministry of Road
Digital Media Ethics Code) Amendment Rules, 2025, Transport and Highways, October 27, 2025,
Ministry of Electronics and Information Technology, https://egazette.gov.in/WriteReadData/2025/267201.pdf.
October 22, 2025, DISCLAIMER: This document is being furnished to you
https://www.meity.gov.in/static/uploads/2025/10/38be31bac for your information. You may choose to reproduce or
9d39bbe22f24fc42442d5d1.pdf. redistribute this report for non-commercial purposes in
24 The National Sports Governance Act, 2025, Ministry of part or in full to any other person with due
Youth Affairs & Sports, https://yas.gov.in/national-sports- acknowledgement of PRS Legislative Research (“PRS”).
governance-act-2025 The opinions expressed herein are entirely those of the
25 Draft National Sports Governance (National Sports Board) author(s). PRS makes every effort to use reliable and
Rules, Ministry of Youth and Sports Affairs, October 15, comprehensive information, but PRS does not represent
2025, https://yas.gov.in/sports/draft-national-sports- that the contents of the report are accurate or complete.
governance-national-sports-board-rules-2025-inviting- PRS is an independent, not-for-profit group. This
comments. document has been prepared without regard to the
objectives or opinions of those who may receive it.
26 Draft National Sports Governance (National Sports
Bodies) Rules, Ministry of Youth and Sports Affairs,
October 15, 2025, https://yas.gov.in/sports/draft-national-
sports-governance-national-sports-bodies-rules-2025-
inviting-comments.
19
