Monthly Policy Review
August 2025
Highlights of this Issue
Monsoon session of Parliament concludes (p. 2)
The monsoon session of Parliament concluded on August 21, 2025. The session had 21 sittings. 13 Bills were
introduced during this session, 14 were passed, and five were referred to Committees.
Repo rate kept unchanged at 5.5% (p. 2)
RBI’s Monetary Policy Committee voted to maintain the repo rate at 5.5%. The standing deposit facility rate,
marginal standing facility rate and bank rate were also kept unchanged.
GDP grows at 7.8% in first quarter of 2025-26 (p.2)
Public services sector registered the highest growth in the first quarter of 2025-26 (9.8%), followed by financial,
real estate and professional services (9.5%), and trade, hotels, transport, and communication (8.6%).
The Income-Tax (No.2) Bill, 2025 passed by Parliament (p.3)
The Bill replaces the Income-Tax Act, 1961. It retains most of the provisions of the Act. It mainly simplifies
the language and removes redundant provisions.
The Insolvency and Bankruptcy Code (Amendment) Bill, 2025 introduced (p. 3)
The Bill introduces a creditor-initiated insolvency resolution process for corporate debtors, with an out-of-court
initiation process. It also provides for group insolvency and cross-border insolvency resolution.
The Constitution (130th) Bill, 2025 introduced (p. 6)
The Bill seeks to provide for removal of the Prime Minister, a Chief Minister, or any other Minister if he is
detained in custody for 30 consecutive days for an offence punishable with imprisonment of five years or more.
The Jan Vishwas (Amendment of Provisions) Bill, 2025 introduced (p. 6)
The Bill amends 17 central Acts to decriminalise or rationalise certain offences and penalties. It provides for
warning, censure, or improvement notices for the first offence in certain cases.
Four Bills related to shipping and ports passed by Parliament (p. 8)
These Bills replace the Merchant Shipping Act, 1958, the Indian Ports Act, 1908, and the Carriage of Goods by
Sea Act, 1925. Most of the earlier provisions are being retained.
The Mines and Minerals (Development and Regulation) Amendment Bill passed (p. 8)
Inclusion of other minerals in a mining lease will be permitted. Scope of the National Mineral Exploration Trust
will be expanded to also fund development of mines, and projects in offshore areas and outside India.
The National Sports Governance Bill, 2025 passed by Parliament (p. 10)
The Bill sets up the National Sports Board which will recognise national sports governing bodies. It also sets up
the National Sports Tribunal to adjudicate sports-related disputes.
Bill to prohibit online money gaming passed by Parliament (p. 11)
The Bill prohibits online money gaming and related services. The prohibition pertains to games that involve
users paying money or other stakes in expectation of receiving monetary or other enrichment.
Standing Committees of Parliament submitted reports
Standing Committees of Parliament submitted various reports. These include issues related to cyber-crime,
safety in civil aviation, steel scrap recycling, reservation in higher education, and food processing.
September 1, 2025
PRS Legislative Research ■ Institute for Policy Research Studies
3rd Floor, Gandharva Mahavidyalaya ■ 212, Deen Dayal Upadhyaya Marg ■ New Delhi – 110002
Tel: (011) 2323 4801, 4343 4035 ■ www.prsindia.org
Monthly Policy Review – August 2025 PRS Legislative Research
Parliament  Projection for real GDP growth for 2025-26 was
retained at 6.5%.
Atri Prasad Rout (atri@prsindia.org)
GDP grows at 7.8% in first quarter of 2025-26
Monsoon Session 2025 concludes
Gross Domestic Product (at constant prices) grew at
The Monsoon Session of Parliament was held from 7.8% in the first quarter (April-June) of 2025- 26, over
July 21, 2025 to August 21, 2025, with 21 sittings. the corresponding period in 2024-25.2 In the first
During the session, 13 Bills were introduced, and 14 quarter of 2024-25, GDP grew by 6.5%. In the fourth
Bills were passed. quarter (January-March) of 2024-25, GDP is estimated
to grow at 7.4%. Nominal GDP grows at 8.8% during
Three Bills were together referred to a Joint Committee
the quarter, implying inflation of about 1%.
of both Houses. These Bills provide for the removal of
the Prime Minister, Chief Minister, and other Ministers GDP across economic sectors is measured in terms of
in case of arrest and detention for serious criminal Gross Value Added (GVA). Public services sector
offences. Two Bills were referred to Select registered the highest growth in the first quarter of
Committees of Lok Sabha. These are the Insolvency 2025-26 (9.8%), followed by financial, real estate and
and Bankruptcy Code (Amendment) Bill, 2025, and the professional services (9.5%), and trade, hotels,
Jan Vishwas (Amendment of Provisions) Bill, 2025. transport, and communication services (8.6%).
Eight Bills were introduced and passed during this Figure 1: GDP growth at constant 2011-12 prices (in
session. These include: (i) the Income-Tax (No.2) Bill, percentage, year-on-year)
2025, (ii) the National Sports Governance Bill, 2025,
12%
(iii) the Promotion and Regulation of Online Gaming
Bill, 2025, (iv) the Mines and Minerals (Development 10% 9.7% 9.3% 9.5% 8.4%
7.8%
and Regulation) Amendment Bill, 2025, and (v) the 8% 7.4%
6.5% 6.4%
National Anti-Doping (Amendment) Bill, 2025. The 5.6%
6%
Income-Tax Bill, 2025, introduced during the Budget
session, was withdrawn, and was replaced by the 4%
Income-Tax (No.2) Bill, 2025.
2%
Five Bills related to ports and shipping, and a Bill to 0%
reserve seats in the Goa Legislative Assembly for Q1 Q2 Q3 Q4 Q1 Q2 Q3 Q4 Q1
scheduled tribes, which were pending from previous
2023-24 2024-25 2025-
sessions, were also passed during this session.
26
For more details on the legislative business taken up Sources: Ministry of Statistics and Programme Implementation; PRS.
during the session, see here. Table 1: Growth in GVA across sectors in the first
quarter of 2025-26, (in %, year-on-year)
For details on the functioning of Parliament during the
session, see here. Quarter 1
Sector
2023-24 2024-25 2025-26
Agriculture 5.7% 1.5% 3.7%
Macroeconomic Development Mining 4.1% 6.6% -3.1%
Manufacturing 7.3% 7.6% 7.7%
Shania Ali (shania@prsindia.org)
Electricity 4.1% 10.2% 0.5%
Repo rate kept unchanged at 5.5%
Construction 9.2% 10.1% 7.6%
The Monetary Policy Committee (MPC) of the Reserve Trade 11.0% 5.4% 8.6%
Bank of India (RBI) voted to maintain the policy repo
Financial Services 15.0% 6.6% 9.5%
rate (the rate at which RBI lends money to banks) at
5.5%.1 Other decisions of the MPC include: Public Services 9.3% 9.0% 9.8%
GVA 9.9% 6.5% 7.6%
 The standing deposit facility rate (the rate at which
RBI borrows from banks without giving collateral) GDP 9.7% 6.5% 7.8%
was kept unchanged at 5.25%. Sources: Ministry of Statistics and Programme Implementation; PRS.
 The marginal standing facility rate (rate at which
Industrial production grows by 2% in the first
banks borrow additional money from RBI) and the
quarter of 2025-26
bank rate (rate at which RBI buys bills of
exchange) were kept unchanged at 5.25% and The Index of Industrial Production (IIP) grew by 2.0%
5.75%, respectively. in the first quarter (April-June) of 2025-26, lower than
34
the same period in 2024-25 (an increase of 5.5%).
 The MPC decided to continue with its neutral
stance. Note that manufacturing (78%) has the highest
- 2 -
Monthly Policy Review – August 2025 PRS Legislative Research
weightage in the calculation of the IIP, followed by these provisions with general powers for the
mining (14%) and electricity (8%). central government to frame new schemes for
greater efficiency, transparency, and
Manufacturing increased by 3.3% in the first quarter of
accountability. This may be done by: (i)
2025-26. Both electricity and mining registered a
eliminating the interface with the assessee
decrease. Mining decreased by 3.0% in the first quarter
through technology, or (ii) optimising resource
of 2025-26. In the corresponding quarter of 2024-25,
utilisation through economies of scale and
mining had increased by 7.9%. Electricity registered a
functional specialisation. Such schemes must be
decrease of 1.5%.
laid before Parliament.
Figure 2: Growth in IIP (%, year-on-year)
 Virtual digital space: The Act allows income
6%
tax authorities to enter and search buildings and
4% 3.3% break open locks. This can be done if certain
2.0% documents or books of accounts are not produced
2% by a person for whom a summon has been issued
under the Act. The Act also empowers the
0%
authorities to inspect electronic documents. The
-2% -1.5% Bill retains these provisions and also allows
authorities to gain access of a virtual digital space
-4% -3.0%
during search and seizure proceedings. The
-6% authorities will have power to gain access by
overriding any required access code. The Bill
-8%
defines virtual digital space as an environment,
-10% area, or realm that is constructed and experienced
IIP Mining Mfg Electricity through computer technology. It includes email
servers, social media accounts, online investment
Apr-25 May-25 Jun-25 Apr-Jun 25
and trading accounts, and websites for storing
Sources: Ministry of Statistics and Programme Implementation; PRS.
details of asset ownership.
For a PRS summary of the Bill, see here.
Finance
The Taxation Laws (Amendment) Bill, 2025
passed by Parliament
The Income-Tax (No.2) Bill, 2025 passed by
Ayush Stephen Toppo (ayush@prsindia.org)
Parliament
Saket Surya (saket@prsindia.org) The Taxation Laws (Amendment) Bill, 2025 was
passed by Parliament.6 The Bill amends the Income-
The Income-Tax (No.2) Bill, 2025 was passed by Tax Act, 1961, and the Finance Act, 2025.7
Parliament.5 It replaces the Income-Tax Act, 1961.
 Exemptions for the Unified Pension Scheme:
This Bill was brought in place of the Income-Tax Bill,
The 1961 Act exempts certain payments by the
2025 introduced in February 2025. The earlier Bill
National Pension System Trust from income tax.
was referred to a Select Committee of Lok Sabha
The Bill extends this exemption to the Unified
(Chair: Mr. Baijayant Panda), and was subsequently
Pension Scheme, which has been introduced as an
withdrawn. The Income-Tax (No.2) Bill, 2025
option to central government employees.
incorporates the recommendations of the Select
Committee. The Bill retains most of the provisions of  Exemptions for the Public Investment Fund of
the 1961 Act. It primarily aims to simplify the Saudi Arabia: The Act provides for tax
language and remove redundant provisions. Tax rates exemptions on income from investments made in
and regimes for individuals and corporations remain India by certain sovereign wealth funds. This has
unchanged. Most definitions have been retained. been extended to the fund of Government of Saudi
There are no changes in offences and penalties. The Arabia.
Bill also retains the tax administration structure. The
For a PRS summary of the Bill, see here.
Bill proposes April 1, 2026 as the date of its
commencement. Key changes include:
The IBC (Amendment) Bill, 2025 introduced in
 Power to frame schemes: The Act provides for Lok Sabha
faceless collection of information and assessment
Shania Ali (shania@prsindia.org)
of tax cases. The Bill retains these provisions.
The Act also has specific provisions for faceless
The Insolvency and Bankruptcy Code (Amendment)
mechanism for areas such as: (i) inquiry or
Bill, 2025 was introduced in the Lok Sabha to amend
valuation, (ii) revision of orders, and (iii)
the Insolvency and Bankruptcy Code, 2016 (IBC).8,9
collection and recovery of tax. The Bill replaces
The Code provides a time-bound process for resolving
- 3 -
Monthly Policy Review – August 2025 PRS Legislative Research
insolvency among companies and individuals. The Bill cautioned that targeting only core inflation (which
has been referred to a Select Committee of Lok Sabha. excludes food and fuel prices) could erode
Key changes under the Bill include: credibility. It highlighted that almost all inflation-
targeting countries focus on headline inflation.
 Creditor-initiated insolvency resolution process
(CIIRP): The Bill provides for a CIIRP for  Retaining or revising the 4% target: RBI noted
certain categories of corporate debtors notified by that 4% is the desirable inflation rate for optimal
the government. CIIRP may be initiated by a macroeconomic conditions. It observed that
specified financial creditor with approval of at raising the target can be interpreted by global
least 51% of financial creditors (by value of debt). investors as a dilution of the framework, thereby
The creditor initiating CIIRP must inform the weakening policy credibility.
debtor, and allow him at least 30 days to make
 Appropriateness of the tolerance band: RBI
representation. The debtor may also file objections
suggested using threshold inflation for setting
before the National Company Law Tribunal
upper tolerance level. Threshold inflation is the
(NCLT) against the commencement of the process.
rate above which growth is adversely impacted by
During CIIRP, management of the company will
inflation. The rate below which inflation can
remain with the debtor, subject to oversight by a
disincentivise production can determine the lower
Resolution Professional.
level. Many developing economies target 3-4%
 Group insolvency: The Bill empowers the central inflation with a 1-1.5% tolerance band.
government to prescribe rules for insolvency
 Fixed target vs range-based targeting: RBI
proceedings against two or more corporate debtors
noted that transitioning from a fixed target to
that form part of a group.
range-based targeting (4-6% or 3-6%) may
 Cross-border insolvency: The Bill empowers the undermine policy credibility and diminish fiscal
central government to prescribe the manner and policy discipline.
conditions for administering and conducting cross-
Comments are invited by September 18, 2025.
border insolvency resolution proceedings.
For a PRS summary of the discussion paper, see here.
 Admission of Corporate Insolvency Resolution
Process: The Bill makes it mandatory for NCLT
RBI releases a report on framework to guide
to admit an application if the default is proven, the
use of AI in the financial sector
application is complete, and no disciplinary
proceedings are pending against proposed
Shania Ali (shania@prsindia.org)
Resolution Professional. NCLT must pass the
order within 14 days of receiving the application. The Reserve Bank of India (RBI) released the report of
The Bill specifies that: (i) NCLT must record the Committee (Chair: Dr. Pushpak Bhattacharyya) on
reasons in writing if no order is passed within 14 Developing a Framework for Responsible and Ethical
days, and (ii) records from financial institutions Enablement of Artificial Intelligence (FREE-AI) in the
will be sufficient proof of default. financial sector.11 Key recommendations include:
For a PRS summary of the Bill, see here.  Fostering innovation: The Committee made
following key recommendations to encourage
RBI releases a discussion paper on monetary innovation: (i) establishing shared infrastructure to
policy framework democratise access to data, (ii) development of
indigenous financial sector-specific AI models,
Shania Ali (shania@prsindia.org)
(iii) formulation of an AI policy to provide
necessary regulatory guidance, (iv) sharing of best
The Reserve Bank of India (RBI) released a discussion
practices and learnings across the sector, and (v)
paper on review of the monetary policy framework.10
developing a more tolerant approach to compliance
In May 2016, the RBI Act, 1934 was amended to
for low-risk AI solutions.
mandate a flexible inflation-targeting regime, under
which the central government sets a consumer price  Mitigating AI risks: The Committee
index (CPI) inflation target every five years in recommended implementation of a risk mitigation
consultation with the RBI. In August 2016, a target of and AI deployment framework. It recommended:
4% inflation with a ±2% tolerance band was notified (i) expansion of approval processes for AI-enabled
for 2016–21. In March 2021, the same target was products, (ii) developing consumer protection
retained for another five-year term ending in March frameworks and inclusion of AI-related aspects in
2026. A review is due by the end of March 2026. Key audits, (iii) improving cybersecurity practices and
issues discussed by the paper include: incident reporting frameworks, (iv) establishment
of governance frameworks across the AI lifecycle,
 Targeting headline or core inflation: RBI noted
and (v) improving consumer awareness regarding
arguments for excluding food and fuel from
safe AI usage and consumer rights.
inflation targeting due to their volatile nature and
weak response to monetary policy. However, it
- 4 -
Monthly Policy Review – August 2025 PRS Legislative Research
SEBI issues consultation papers on various regulations that are redundant and bring parity with
subjects sub-regulations. Qualified stock brokers are large,
systematically important stock brokers designated
Shania Ali (shania@prsindia.org)
by SEBI based on their trading volumes, client
numbers, assets, market impact, and governance
The Securities and Exchange Board of India (SEBI)
standards. The proposed changes aim to simplify
released consultation papers on amendments proposed
compliance, align with modern market practices,
to: (i) minimum public offers (MPO) and minimum
harmonise with Companies Act, 2013 and other
public shareholding (MPS) requirements under the
regulations, and enhance investor protection.
Securities Contracts (Regulation) Rules of 1957, (ii)
provisions on Related Party Transactions (RPT) under Comments are invited until September 8, 2025.
SEBI (Listing Obligations and Disclosure
Requirements) Regulations, 2015 and associated Standing Committee submits report on
circulars, and (iii) stock broker regulations under SEBI roadmap for economic growth
(Stock Brokers) Regulations, 1992. 12,13,14 Key changes
Shania Ali (shania@prsindia.org)
proposed are:
 MPO and MPS requirements: MPO refers to the The Standing Committee on Finance (Chair: Mr.
minimum portion of shares a company must offer Bhartruhari Mahtab) submitted report on ‘Roadmap for
to the public at the time of listing. MPS refers to Indian Economic Growth in Light of Global Economic
the minimum level of public shareholding that and Geopolitical Circumstances’.15 The Committee
must be maintained post-listing. SEBI has identified 12 catalysts for growth. These include
proposed revised market capitalisation thresholds. manufacturing and trade, MSMEs, agriculture, price
It has also proposed lowering MPO requirements stability, credit availability, infrastructure, and energy
for very large issuers. MPS timelines have also transition. Key recommendations made by the
been eased, allowing up to 10 years for some large Committee to accelerate growth include: (i) expanding
companies to reach 25% public shareholding, support for high-technology sectors under Production
instead of the current five years. The 35% retail Linked Incentive schemes, (ii) diversifying investor
quota in IPOs will remain unchanged. base and promoting strategic sectors to attract FDI, (iii)
deepening credit penetration for MSMEs in
 Related party transactions: The proposed
underserved regions, (iv) encouraging private sector
amendments seek to revise thresholds for
participation in agri-tech, and (v) boosting deposit
determining material RPTs undertaken by listed
mobilisation through digital initiatives.
entities and their subsidiaries. They also seek to
provide relaxation in the information to be For a PRS summary of the report, see here.
furnished to the Audit Committee and shareholders
for the approval of RPTs. Amendments provide Standing Committee submits report on
for codifying validity periods for omnibus evolving role of CCI
approvals by shareholders. Omnibus approvals, in
the context of RPTs, are standing approvals Shania Ali (shania@prsindia.org)
granted for a class of transactions that are
repetitive or cannot be foreseen at the time of The Standing Committee on Finance (Chair: Mr.
approval. Through these, companies can avoid the Bhartruhari Mahtab) submitted report on ‘Evolving
need for seeking individual approvals for each Role of Competition Commission of India (CCI) in the
transaction. Amendments also clarify applicability Economy, Particularly the Digital Landscape’.16 The
of RPT provisions for certain kinds of transactions. Committee made recommendations to enhance CCI’s
effectiveness in addressing anti-competitive practices
 Stock broker regulations: The proposed changes in the digital sector. Key recommendations include: (i)
are the outcome of a working group comprising refining thresholds under the Draft Digital Competition
representatives from stock exchanges, brokers, Bill to avoid inadvertently regulating fast-growing
legal experts, academicians, and investor domestic firms, (ii) implementing the National
associations. Key changes proposed are: (i) Competition Policy, (iii) formalising agreements for
addition of new definitions like algorithmic trading cooperation with sectoral regulators and establishing
and amendments to a few existing definitions, (ii) protocols for information sharing and joint action, (iv)
introducing the requirements for seeking SEBI increasing the sanctioned strength of CCI and expertise
approval for change in control and intimation of of staff in emerging technologies, and (v) considering
material changes besides change in control, (iii) non-price parameters such as service quality, privacy,
enhanced obligations for qualified stock brokers, and entry barriers to markets.
(iv) insertion of obligations and responsibilities of
stock brokers, (v) insertion of activities restricted For a PRS summary of the report, see here.
for stock brokers, and (vi) amendments to
procedure for action in case of default and other
provisions to remove inconsistency, omit
- 5 -
Monthly Policy Review – August 2025 PRS Legislative Research
Law and Justice (ii) increasing use of AI to generate misleading content,
(iii) increase in mule accounts, and (iv) rise in
Shirin Pajnoo (shirin@prsindia.org) complaints against unregistered telemarketers.
Key recommendations of the Committee include: (i)
The Constitution (130th) Amendment Bill, 2025
developing a cybercrime legislation which defines
introduced in Lok Sabha
cyber offences and provides strong penal provisions,
The Constitution (One Hundred and Thirtieth (ii) requiring intermediaries to compensate victims in
Amendment) Bill, 2025 was introduced in Lok Sabha.17 certain cases, (iii) establishing a framework which
It seeks to provide for removal of the Prime Minister, a mandates all AI-generated content to be watermarked,
Chief Minister of a state, or any other Minister, if he is (iv) developing real time detection mechanisms to
arrested and detained in custody on account of serious block unregistered telemarketers, and (v) establishing
criminal offences. The Bill also applies these State Cybercrime Coordination Centres in all
provisions to the Union Territory (UT) of Delhi. Along states/UTs.
with the Constitution Amendment Bill, two more Bills
For a PRS summary of the report, see here.
have been introduced to apply these provisions to UTs
of Puducherry, and Jammu and Kashmir. These are: (i)
the Government of Union Territories (Amendment)
Bill, 2025 and (ii) the Jammu and Kashmir
Commerce and Industry
Reorganisation (Amendment) Bill, 2025.18,19 These
three Bills have been referred to a Joint Parliamentary
Committee. Key features of the Bills include: The Jan Vishwas (Amendment of Provisions)
Bill, 2025 introduced in Lok Sabha
 Grounds for removal: The Prime Minister, a
Chief Minister, or a Minister will be removed from Vaishali Dhariwal (vaishali@prsindia.org)
office if: (i) he is accused of an offence punishable
with imprisonment for a term which may extend to The Jan Vishwas (Amendment of Provisions) Bill,
five years or more, and (ii) he has been arrested 2025 was introduced in Lok Sabha.22 It seeks to amend
and detained in custody for 30 consecutive days. 17 central Acts to mainly decriminalise or rationalise
certain offences and penalties. The Bill has been
 No bar on re-appointments: A Minister who is
referred to a Select Committee of Lok Sabha. Key
removed from office under these provisions, may
changes include:
be re-appointed after being released from custody.
 Decriminalising offences: The Bill
For a PRS summary of the Constitutional Amendment
decriminalises several offences. For example,
Bill, see here.
under the Motor Vehicles Act, 1988, driving by a
For a PRS summary of Bills applying these provisions person who is mentally or physically unfit to drive,
to the UTs of Puducherry, and Jammu and Kashmir, is punishable with a fine. The Bill replaces the
see here and here. fine with a monetary penalty.
 Removal of imprisonment term: In some cases,
Bill to reserve seats for scheduled tribes in Goa
the Bill removes the imprisonment for an offence.
Assembly passed by Parliament Under the Legal Metrology Act, 2009, if an owner
of a government-approved test centre wilfully
The Readjustment of Representation of Scheduled
stamps any weight or measure in contravention of
Tribes in Assembly Constituencies of the State of Goa
the Act, he will be liable for imprisonment up to
Bill, 2024 was passed by Parliament.20 The Bill
one year, a fine, or both. The Bill removes the
reserves seats in the Goa Legislative Assembly for
imprisonment term and retains fine.
Scheduled Tribes in proportion to the population.
 Revision of fines and penalties: The Bill also
For a PRS summary of the Bill, see here.
revises the monetary value of fines and penalties
for several offences and specifies an increase by
Standing Committee on Home Affairs submits
10% of the respective minimum amount every
report on cybercrime
three years.
The Standing Committee on Home Affairs (Chair: Dr.
 Removal of penalties for first instance of an
Radha Mohan Das Agrawal) submitted its report on
offence: The Bill amends some Acts to provide
‘Cyber Crime: Ramifications, Protection and
for warnings in the first instance of an offence.
Prevention’ on August 20, 2025.21 Cybercrime refers
For example, the Central Silk Board Act, 1948
to an unlawful act involving the use of technology and
penalises providing false information with
digital systems to commit or facilitate a crime. These
imprisonment, a fine, or both. The Bill provides
include crimes in the cyber space such as theft, fraud,
for a warning in case of the first offence.
forgery, defamation, hacking, malware distribution, and
cyber terrorism. The Committee highlighted following  Improvement notices: Under the Legal
key issues: (i) lack of a comprehensive cybercrime law, Metrology Act, 2009, several offences, such as
- 6 -
Monthly Policy Review – August 2025 PRS Legislative Research
manufacturing, using, or selling non-standard until March 2026. It will now be implemented until
weights and measures, are punishable with fines. March 2028 with no additional outlay. The scheme
The Bill instead provides that an improvement aims to: (i) support adoption of electric vehicles, (ii)
notice may be issued in case of the first offence. establish charging infrastructure, and (iii) build EV
Such notices require rectifying non-compliance manufacturing ecosystem. This extension is provided
within a specified time. Subsequent offences will primarily for e-buses, e-trucks, and testing agencies.
be punishable with a fine. The duration for incentives on e-two wheelers, e-
rickshaws, and e-three wheelers has not been extended.
 Property tax and advertisement tax in New
Delhi municipal area: The Bill amends the New
Standing Committee on Coal, Mines and Steel
Delhi Municipal Council Act, 1994. The Act
submits report on Steel Scrap Recycling Policy
provides for the levy of property tax. The Bill
specifies that property tax will consist of a building Vaishali Dhariwal (vaishali@prsindia.org)
tax and a vacant land tax. It establishes a
Municipal Valuation Committee to recommend The Standing Committee on Coal, Mines and Steel
base value for vacant lands and buildings, and (Chair: Mr. Anurag Singh Thakur) submitted its report
manner of determining and revising property tax. on ‘Steel Scrap Recycling Policy’. The Committee
It removes provisions for advertisement tax. recommended granting industry status to the steel scrap
sector to attract investment, create jobs, and enable
For a PRS summary of the Bill, see here.
access to loans. It also noted limited scrap availability
as a key barrier, and recommended formalising
Cabinet approves extension of PM-SVANidhi
informal markets and dismantling unused vehicles to
scheme until March 2030
increase availability of scrap material. It highlighted
Shrusti Singh (shrusti@prsindia.org) the need for certification courses on scrap handling
under the National Skill Development Mission. The
The Cabinet approved the restructuring and extension Committee further highlighted the steel industry’s high
of the lending period of the PM SVANidhi Scheme emission intensity and recommended faster transition to
until March 31, 2030.23 The scheme was announced in scrap-based production. It recommended giving
June 2020 to provide working capital loans at a temporary preference to scrap-based steel in
subsidised interest rate to street vendors.24 In addition procurement and factoring emissions into production
to statutory towns, the scheme will now also cover costs. It also recommended creating a centralised scrap
street vendors in census towns and peri-urban areas. database with the Ministry of Steel as nodal agency.
The total outlay under the scheme is expected to be Rs
For a PRS summary of the report, see here.
7,332 crore. It aims to benefit 50 lakh new
beneficiaries. Key changes include:
Standing Committee on Commerce submits
 Enhanced loan amount: Under the scheme, loans report on Indian Leather Industry
are provided in three tranches. Beneficiaries are
Jahanvi Choudhary (jahanvi@prsindia.org)
eligible for the next loan on timely or early
repayment of the previous loans. Currently, the
The Standing Committee on Commerce (Chair: Ms.
initial working capital loan is capped at Rs 10,000.
Dola Sen) submitted its report on the ‘Indian Leather
This amount has been increased to Rs 15,000. The
Industry: Current Analysis and Future Prospects’. The
limit for second loan has been increased from Rs
Committee observed some challenges in the leather
20,000 to Rs 25,000. The limit for the third
industry such as shortage of quality raw materials,
tranche of loan remains unchanged at Rs 50,000.
fragmented nature of the industry, and lack of eco-
 UPI-linked credit card: Beneficiaries who have friendly leather alternatives. Key recommendations
repaid the second tranche of loan will be eligible to include: (i) improving leather collection and processing
receive a UPI-linked RUPAY credit card. infrastructure, (ii) establishing central portals to
organise the sector and track upskilling training, (iii)
 Training: The scheme will also focus on capacity
providing financial assistance to MSMEs, (iv)
building of street vendors through trainings on
leveraging existing FTAs and negotiating new FTAs
financial literacy, digital skills, marketing,
with potential markets such as EU and USA, and (v)
entrepreneurship, and food safety and hygiene.
establishing more treatment plants and spread
awareness of processes banned in other countries.
The PM E-DRIVE scheme extended until
March 2028 For a PRS summary of the report, see here.
Jahanvi Choudhary (jahanvi@prsindia.org)
The Ministry of Heavy Industries notified the extension
of the duration of PM E-drive scheme by another two
years.25 The scheme was notified in 2024 with an
outlay of Rs 10,900 crore and was to be implemented
- 7 -
Monthly Policy Review – August 2025 PRS Legislative Research
Standing Committee on Commerce submits exploration and development in offshore areas and
report on Commodity Boards outside India. Under the Act, all lessees are
required to pay two percent of royalty into the
Jahanvi Choudhary (jahanvi@prsindia.org)
Trust. The Bill increases this to three percent.
The Standing Committee on Commerce (Chair: Ms.  Removal of limit on sale for captive mines:
Dola Sen) submitted its report on the ‘Performance Under the Act, captive mines are allowed to sell up
Evaluation and Review of some Commodity Boards’. to 50% of minerals produced in a year, after
It observed some issues across the Commodity Boards meeting end-use requirements. The Bill removes
of Coffee, Tea, Rubber, and Spices. These include: (i) the limit on sale of minerals.
export challenges due to unreasonable standards set by
For a PRS summary of the Bill, see here.
importing countries and high freight charges, (ii)
climate risks associated with certain kinds of plantation
such as rubber, (iii) budgetary allocation not meeting
the sectors’ needs and underutilisation of sanctioned
Shipping and Ports
funds, and (iv) low yields.
Key recommendations by the Committee include: (i) The Merchant Shipping Bill, 2024 passed by
duty free import of machinery used for coffee
Parliament
processing, (ii) providing transport and marketing
assistance for coffee and spices, (iii) establishing Vaishali Dhariwal (vaishali@prsindia.org)
minimum import price for compound rubber and
spices, (iv) introducing carbon credits for rubber The Merchant Shipping Bill, 2024 was passed by
plantation, (v) including the spices sector under the Parliament.28 It replaces the Merchant Shipping Act,
Product Linked Incentive scheme, (vi) government 1958.29 Key features of the Bill include:
supported replantation programs, and (vii) ensuring
 Mandatory registration of vessels: Under the
sufficient funding across Boards.
Act, all sea going Indian vessels must be
registered, except certain vessels which are: (i) not
mechanically propelled, or (ii) weighing below 15
tons and used only for navigating Indian coasts.
Mining
The Act defines vessels to include any ships, boats,
sailing vessels, or other vessels used in navigation.
Vaishali Dhariwal (vaishali@prsindia.org)
The Bill instead requires all vessels to be registered
regardless of type of propulsion or weight.
The Mines and Minerals (Development and
Regulation) Amendment Bill, 2025 passed by  Ownership of Indian vessels: The Act specifies
Parliament criteria for ownership of Indian vessels. Under the
Act, an Indian vessel means a vessel wholly owned
The Mines and Minerals (Development and
by a: (i) citizen of India, (ii) company or body
Regulation) Amendment Bill, 2025 was passed by
established by or under Indian laws with its
Parliament.26 The Bill amends the Mines and Minerals
principal place of business in India, or (iii)
(Development and Regulation) Act, 1957.27 Key
registered co-operative society. The Bill relaxes
changes include:
the criteria to also include: (i) vessels which are
 Inclusion of other minerals in a mining lease: partly owned by above persons, and (ii) vessels
Under the Act, a mining lease is granted for a wholly or partly owned by Overseas Citizens of
specific mineral. The Bill provides that lease India (OCIs).
holders may apply to the state government for
 Registration of certain foreign vessels: The Bill
adding other minerals to an existing lease. For
adds that a foreign vessel chartered by an Indian
inclusion of critical and strategic minerals, and
person may be registered as an Indian vessel. This
other specified minerals, no additional amount
will apply where the ownership is intended to be
need to be paid. For inclusion of other minerals,
transferred to the charterer after a specified period.
the lease holder must pay an amount equivalent to
the royalty for that mineral. In case of auctioned  Authorities for regulation of shipping: The Act
mines, the lease holder must additionally pay the empowers the central government to appoint the
auction premium for the included mineral. Director-General of Shipping. The government
may delegate its powers and functions under the
 Expanding scope of National Mineral
Act to the Director-General. The Act establishes
Exploration Trust: The Act establishes the
Boards to advise the central government: (i) the
National Mineral Exploration Trust to fund
National Shipping Board for matters related to
mineral exploration in the country. The Bill
shipping, and (ii) the National Welfare Board for
widens the scope of the Trust to also fund
Seafarers, to advise on welfare of seafarers. The
development of mines and minerals. Further, it
Bill retains these provisions.
allows the usage of funds in the Trust for
- 8 -
Monthly Policy Review – August 2025 PRS Legislative Research
For a PRS summary of the Bill, see here. related to ports, and (iii) ensuring transparency of
port tariff. It will also make recommendations on
The Coastal Shipping Bill, 2024 passed by matters related to legislative adequacy, efficiency of
Parliament ports and connectivity to ports.
Vaishali Dhariwal (vaishali@prsindia.org)  State Maritime Boards: The Bill provides
recognition to state maritime boards specified in the
The Coastal Shipping Bill, 2024 was passed by schedule to the Bill. Functions of the State
Parliament.30 The Bill regulates vessels engaged in Maritime Boards include: (i) exercising licensing
trade within Indian coastal waters. It repeals Part XIV functions for port infrastructure, (ii) supervision of
of the Merchant Shipping Act, 1958, which regulates all port works, (iii) fixing port tariff, and (iv)
ships other than sailing vessels engaged in trade within regulation of navigation within port limits.
coastal waters.29 Key features include:
 Dispute Resolution Committee: The Bill requires
 Services to be covered under coasting trade: every state government to constitute a dispute
Under the Act, coasting trade refers to the carriage resolution committee. The committee will
of goods and passengers from one place or port in adjudicate disputes arising between non-major
India to another. The Bill expands this definition ports, port concessionaires, port users, and port
to include provision of services. Services include service providers within the state. Appeals against
exploration, research, and any other commercial orders of the Committee may be made to the High
activity, except fishing. Court within 60 days.
 Licence for coasting trade and other purposes:  Tariffs: Ports are classified as either major or non-
The Act requires licence for all vessels engaging in major ports. Under the Bill, the tariff for a major
coasting trade. The Bill states that vessels wholly port will be fixed by the: (i) Board of Major Port
owned by Indian persons will not need a licence. Authority, or (ii) Board of Directors of a port
For purposes other than coasting trade, the Bill registered as a company. For non-major ports, the
requires licence for vessels that are not wholly State Maritime Board or an authorised
owned by Indian persons. These are vessels that: concessionaire will fix tariffs.
(i) are hired by Indian persons, non-resident
For a PRS analysis of the Bill, see here.
Indians or overseas citizens of India (OCIs), and
(ii) are operating between Indian and international
The Carriage of Goods by Sea Bill, 2024 passed
ports, or between international ports.
by Parliament
 Revision of penalties: Under the Act, engaging in
Vaishali Dhariwal (vaishali@prsindia.org)
coasting trade or taking a vessel to sea without a
licence is punishable with imprisonment of up to
The Carriage of Goods by Sea Bill, 2024 was passed by
six months, a fine of up to Rs 1,000, or both. The
Parliament.33 The Bill replaces the Indian Carriage of
Bill increases the maximum fine to Rs 15 lakh or
Goods by Sea Act, 1925.34 The Act establishes the
four times the gains from an unlicensed voyage,
responsibilities, liabilities, rights, and immunities in
whichever is higher.
case of goods carried from a port in India to another
For a PRS summary of the Bill, see here. port in India or any other port in the world. The Bill
retains all provisions of the Act.
The Indian Ports Bill, 2025 passed by
For a PRS summary of the Bill, see here.
Parliament
Ayush Stephen Toppo (ayush@prsindia.org)
External Affairs
The Indian Ports Bill, 2025 was passed by Parliament.31
This Bill replaces the Indian Ports Act, 1908.32 The
Shirin Pajnoo (shirin@prsindia.org)
Act outlines the powers of the central and state
governments with respect to: (i) altering port limits, (ii)
Prime Minister visits Japan for bilateral talks
safety and conservation of ports, and (iii) levy of fees
and other charges. Key changes include: Prime Minister Mr. Narendra Modi visited Japan for
bilateral talks. India and Japan have developed a joint
 Maritime State Development Council: The Bill
vision for the next decade.35,36 Key areas of
requires the central government to establish the
cooperation agreed during the visit include:
Maritime State Development Council. The Council
will issue guidelines in consultation with central  Economic cooperation: India and Japan set a
and state governments on: (i) data or information to target of private investment worth JPY 10 trillion
be collected by ports along with the manner of in India. They also decided to: (i) review
collection, updating, storage and submission to the implementation of the India-Japan Comprehensive
Council, (ii) dissemination of data or information Economic Cooperation Agreement, (ii) enhance
- 9 -
Monthly Policy Review – August 2025 PRS Legislative Research
collaboration on payment systems, including local EAEU was about USD 69 billion in 2024. The
currency transactions, (iii) launch an India-Japan proposed negotiations seek to: (i) expand market access
economic security initiative for strengthening for Indian exporters, (ii) support diversification into
supply chains in areas such as semiconductors and new sectors and geographies, and (iii) ensure benefits
critical minerals, and (iv) strengthen collaboration to MSMEs.
between Indian and Japanese SMEs.37
Standing Committee on External Affairs
 Security cooperation: Both countries will
submits report on India’s Indian ocean strategy
enhance interoperability and synergy between their
armed forces.38 This includes bilateral and The Standing Committee on External Affairs (Chair:
multilateral exercises and collaboration between Dr. Shashi Tharoor) submitted its report on ‘Evaluation
special operation units. They will also strengthen of India’s Indian Ocean Strategy’.41 The Indian Ocean
co-production of defence equipment. Further, both is the third-largest oceanic division in the world. The
countries will build cyber resilience and expand Committee has highlighted India’s strategic
use of space technologies for national security. responsibility in the Indian Ocean Region. It noted
issues such as: (i) lack of a unified Indian Ocean
 Mobility and sustainability: India and Japan will
strategy, (ii) multiple security threats in the region, (iii)
establish the Next Generation Mobility Partnership
scattered engagement with littoral states of the Indian
(NGMP). It aims to enhance cooperation in high-
ocean region, and (iv) a fragmented approach towards
speed rail systems, decarbonisation, automobiles,
bilateral and multilateral diplomacy. Key
and cold-chain logistics. Both countries also aim
recommendations include: (i) creating a comprehensive
to strengthen the clean energy partnership.
and unified Indian ocean strategy, (ii) engaging with all
 Technology and innovation: The two countries 35 littoral states while catering to each country’s needs
will promote collaboration of start-ups on open- and priorities, and (iii) establishing an inter-ministerial
innovation, advanced technology, data usage, and task force for improved coordination.
finance. They will also promote cooperation in
For a PRS summary of the report, see here.
information and communication technology
through a joint working group.
 Human resource exchange: The two countries
have set a target of five lakh personnel exchange in Sports and Gaming
five years, including 50,000 skilled workers from
India to Japan.
The National Sports Governance Bill, 2025
passed by Parliament
Prime Minister holds bilateral meeting with
Chinese President Jahanvi Choudhary (jahanvi@prsindia.org)
Prime Minister Mr. Narendra Modi had a bilateral
The National Sports Governance Bill, 2025 was passed
meeting with Chinese President Mr Xi Jinping on the
by Parliament.42 The Bill provides for recognition of
sidelines of the meeting of the Shanghai Cooperation
national sports bodies and regulate their functioning.
Organization (SCO).39 Both countries emphasised on
Key features of the Bill include:
the need to develop a fair, reasonable and mutually
acceptable solution to the boundary issue for stable  Governing Bodies for Sports: The Bill provides
bilateral relations. They also highlighted the need to for establishing: (i) National Olympic Committee,
strengthen people-to-people ties through direct flights (ii) National Paralympic Committee, and (iii)
and visa facilitation. Further, they aim to expand National and Regional Sports Federations for each
bilateral trade and investment ties, and reduce trade sport. The Bill requires these bodies to establish:
deficit. Both countries also emphasised on expanding (i) certain committees for their functioning, (ii) a
common ground on global issues such as terrorism and code of ethics to govern conduct of persons such as
fair trade in multilateral platforms. members, affiliates, athletes, coaches, and
sponsors, and (iii) a grievance redressal
India and the Eurasian Economic Union sign mechanism for complaints from such persons. The
terms of reference for a free trade agreement Bill specifies certain conditions such as age limit
for members of executive committee of these
Jahanvi Choudhary (jahanvi@prsindia.org) bodies, and term limit for office bearers such as the
President, the Secretary General, and the
India and the Eurasian Economic Union (EAEU) Treasurer. The Bill states that the international
signed terms of reference to launch negotiations on charters and statutes will primarily govern these
Free Trade Agreement (FTA).40 EAEU comprises bodies. In the event of a conflict with the Bill, the
Armenia, Belarus, Kazakhstan, Kyrgyz Republic, and central government may issue clarifications.
the Russian Federation. The terms of reference lay
down the scope and procedure for the FTA  National Sports Board: The Bill empowers the
negotiations. The bilateral trade between India and central government to establish a National Sports
- 10 -
Monthly Policy Review – August 2025 PRS Legislative Research
Board. This Board will grant recognition to whether an online game qualifies as an online
national sports bodies, inquire into the welfare of money game, and (ii) recognise, categorise, and
sportspersons, and issue guidelines on ethics and register online games. The central government will
compliance with international rules. prescribe the composition, and terms and conditions
for appointments to the Authority. It may also
 National Sports Tribunal: The Bill provides for
designate existing authorities with these powers.
a National Sports Tribunal to address disputes
related to sports. Appeals against its decisions will For a PRS summary of the Bill, see here.
lie before the Supreme Court, except where
international charters or bye-laws require appeal to The National Anti-Doping (Amendment) Bill,
the Court of Arbitration for Sport in Switzerland. 2025 passed by Parliament
 Elections to Sports Bodies: The central Ayush Stephen Toppo (ayush@prsindia.org)
government will establish a national panel of
electoral officers to oversee elections of national The National Anti-Doping (Amendment) Bill, 2025
sports bodies. was passed by Parliament.44 It amends the National
For a PRS summary of the Bill, see here.
Anti-Doping Act, 2022 which prohibits doping in
sports.45 Doping is the consumption of certain
prohibited substances by athletes to enhance
The Promotion and Regulation of Online
performance. The Act establishes: (i) the National
Gaming Bill, 2025 passed by Parliament
Anti-Doping Agency (NADA) to enforce anti-doping
Ayush Stephen Toppo (ayush@prsindia.org) rules, and (ii) the National Board to oversee NADA and
advise the central government on anti-doping
The Promotion and Regulation of Online Gaming Bill, regulations. Key features of the Bill include:
2025 was passed by Parliament.43 The Bill prohibits
 Government to constitute the Appeal Panel: The
online money games, and promotes certain other online
Act requires the National Board to constitute: (i) a
games. Key features of the Bill include:
Disciplinary Panel to determine consequences of
 Prohibition on online money games: The Bill anti-doping violations, and (ii) an Appeal Panel to
prohibits offering or aiding online money games hear appeals against decisions of the Disciplinary
and related services. An online money game is Panel. The Bill transfers the power to constitute the
defined as an online game that involves a user Appeal Panel from the Board to the central
paying money or other stakes in expectation of government, and empowers it to specify the manner
receiving monetary or other enrichment. This is of filing and hearing of appeals.
irrespective of whether the game is based on skill,
 Autonomy of Anti-Doping Bodies: The Act
chance, or both. The Bill also prohibits advertising,
empowers the Board to obtain any information or
and facilitating financial transactions for such
issue directions to the Disciplinary Panel and
games. It also empowers the central government to
Appeal Panel. The Bill removes these powers. It
block any information related to online money
adds that the Director General and other members
gaming services.
of NADA will have operational independence from:
 Promotion of e-sports and online social games: (i) any national or international sports federation,
The Bill empowers the central government to take (ii) Olympic or Paralympic Committee, (iii) any
steps for recognition and development of e-sports government department, and (iv) any agency
and online social games. E-sport is defined as an responsible for sports or anti-doping.
online game that: (i) is played as part of multisport
 Only specified bodies to file appeal to CAS: The
events, (ii) is recognised under the National Sports
Act allows any person to file an appeal to the Court
Governance Act, 2025, (iii) has outcome
of Arbitration for Sport (CAS) in Switzerland,
determined solely by factors such as physical
against a decision of the Appeal Panel. The Bill
dexterity, mental agility, strategic thinking, or
specifies the entities that may file an appeal to CAS.
similar skills, and (iv) involves organised
These include bodies such as the World Anti-
competitive events conducted in multiplayer format
Doping Agency, the International Olympic
and governed by pre-defined rules. It may involve
Committee, the International Paralympic
payment of registration fees and prize money.
Committee, and international sports federations.
However, it must not involve placing of bets or
other stakes, or expectation of any winning out of For a PRS summary of the Bill, see here.
such stakes. An online social game means an
online game offered solely for recreation, Standing Committee on Sports submits report
entertainment, or skill development. It may involve on Sports Authority of India and Khelo India
payment of subscription or one-time access fees but
must not involve any stakes or monetary gains. Jahanvi Choudhary (jahanvi@prsindia.org)
 Authority on Gaming: The central government The Standing Committee on Education, Women,
may constitute an Authority to: (i) determine Children, Youth, and Sports (Chair: Mr. Digvijaya
- 11 -
Monthly Policy Review – August 2025 PRS Legislative Research
Singh) submitted its report on the ‘Review of potential impact on procurers in the context of
functioning and performance of Sports Authority of declining bid-discovered prices.
India (SAI) and Khelo India’.46 SAI is the apex body
The projects that are already bid out and awarded will
responsible for promoting sports and sports excellence
continue but each project will now be treated
in the country. Khelo India is the national program for
individually at its own tariff. Implementing agencies
development of sports. The Committee highlighted
may proceed with signing power purchase agreements
low budget, vacancies in SAI, and a lack of
for these projects.
infrastructure as key challenges. Key
recommendations of the Committee include: (i) setting
up SAI as a statutory body, (ii) targeting sports where
India has the potential to win medals, and (iii)
North-Eastern Region
integrating sports with education from school level to
higher education.
Shirin Pajnoo (shirin@prsindia.org)
For a PRS summary of the report, see here.
Cabinet approves special development schemes
for Assam and Tripura
The Union Cabinet has approved four new components
Energy
under the existing central sector scheme of Special
Development Packages (SDPs) for Assam and
Ayush Stephen Toppo (ayush@prsindia.org)
Tripura.50 The total estimated outlay on these
components is Rs 4,250 crore. These include: (i) Rs
Cabinet approves continuation of subsidy
3,000 crore for development on infrastructure in
under Ujjwala Yojana for 2025-26
Assam, (ii) another Rs 500 crore for development of
The Union Cabinet approved continuation of LPG infrastructure in villages inhabited by tribals in Assam,
subsidy for beneficiaries of the Pradhan Mantri Ujjwala (iii) Rs 500 crore for development of infrastructure in
Yojana (PMUY) for 2025-26.47 This scheme was the North Cacher Hills Autonomous Council area of
launched in 2016 to provide deposit-free LPG Assam, and (iv) Rs 250 crore for development of tribals
connections to women from poor households. of Tripura. These components have been announced as
Beneficiaries receive a cylinder, a pressure regulator, per the memoranda of settlement signed between the
and installation at no cost. The subsidy for LPG central government, the state government, and
cylinder refills was introduced in 2022. It aims to respective ethnic groups. These components aim to: (i)
support continued use of LPG by PMUY households by improve socio-economic conditions of vulnerable and
protecting them from fluctuations in international marginalised groups, (ii) boost employment
prices. Subsidy was initially set at Rs 200 per cylinder opportunities, (iii) provide education and health
for up to 12 refills a year. It was raised to Rs 300 per services, and (iv) increase tourism. These will be
cylinder in 2023. For 2025-26, the subsidy of Rs 300 implemented between 2025-26 and 2029-30.
per cylinder will continue, but limited to nine refills per
year. The total outlay for 2025-26 is estimated at Rs
12,000 crore.
Education
Power Ministry withdraws the uniform
Jahanvi Choudhary (jahanvi@prsindia.org)
renewable energy tariff mechanism
The Ministry of Power has withdrawn the Uniform Bill to establish IIM Guwahati passed by
Renewable Energy Tariff mechanism (URET).48 Parliament
URET was introduced in 2024 for a duration of three
The Indian Institutes of Management (IIM)
years. This mechanism pertains to the price paid by a
(Amendment) Bill, 2025 was passed by Parliament.51
buyer (such as a distribution company) to the
It seeks to amend the IIM Act, 2017 to provide for
developer. These tariffs are usually decided through
establishing an IIM in Guwahati, Assam.
competitive bidding. The Ministry noted that
Renewable Energy Implementing Agencies (such as For a PRS summary of the Bill, see here.
NTPC) and developers have expressed concerns over
procurers’ reluctance to sign power purchase
Cabinet approves the MERITE scheme
agreements under URET. This was due to uncertainty
about tariffs over the implementation period.
The Union Cabinet has approved the Multidisciplinary
Under the URET mechanism, renewable energy Education and Research improvement in Technical
projects were pooled together, and buyers would pay a Education (MERITE) Scheme.52 The scheme will
uniform tariff instead of project-specific tariff.49 The provide support to around 275 government or
different pools included solar power pool and solar- government-aided engineering and polytechnic
wind hybrid pool. The mechanism aimed to address institutions for enhancing employability. Key
- 12 -
Monthly Policy Review – August 2025 PRS Legislative Research
interventions under the scheme include: (i) offering structure of courses leading to affordability challenges,
internship opportunities, (ii) updating curricula to align and (iv) lack of infrastructure in district training
with industry requirements, (iii) organising faculty institutes. Key recommendations include: (i) filling
development programs, and (iv) establishing research vacancies through permanent recruitment by March
hubs. The scheme has been approved for the 2025-30 2026, (ii) establishing at least one district training
period with an estimated outlay of Rs 4,200 crore. It institute and one public teacher education institution in
will be implemented as a central sector scheme. every district, and (iii) establishing that the minimum
qualification to teach pre-primary children must be 12th
UGC invites comments on the draft learning plus a two-year diploma degree.
outcome-based curriculum framework for
For a PRS summary of the report, see here.
undergraduate courses
The University Grants Commission (UGC) released the
draft learning outcome-based curriculum framework
Labour and Employment
for undergraduate courses.53 It aims to serve as a
model curriculum that encourages flexibility and
Shirin Pajnoo (shirin@prsindia.org)
innovation in programme design and syllabus
development. The framework has been prepared for
Comments invited on the Draft Bill to regulate
nine subjects. These are: (i) anthropology, (ii)
private placement agencies
chemistry, (iii) commerce, (iv) geography, (v)
economics, (vi) home science, (vii) mathematics, (viii) The Ministry of Labour and Employment invited
physical education, and (ix) political science. It seeks comments on the draft Private Placement Agency
to align the curricula with the National Education (Regulation) Bill, 2025.55 It seeks to regulate the
Policy, 2020. It also seeks to integrate Indian cultural activities of private placement agencies in India and
and scientific contributions and indigenous systems of abroad to ensure transparency and fairness in
knowledge in the curricula. recruitment practices. Key features include:
Comments are invited until September 20, 2025.  Registration: All private placement agencies
must register with the government. Existing
Standing Committee on Education submits agencies must register within 180 days from
report on reservation in higher education commencement of the Act. For providing
placement services outside India, such agencies
The Standing Committee on Education, Women,
must also obtain necessary authorisation from the
Children, Youth, and Sports (Chair: Mr. Digvijaya
Ministry of External Affairs.
Singh) submitted its report on the ‘Implementation of
Article 15(5) of Indian Constitution regarding special  Obligations of placement agencies: Key
provision for reservation to SCs/STs and OBCs in obligations of registered private placement
educational institutions including private educational agencies include: (i) ensuring that all jobseekers
institutions’.54 The Committee noted that number of and employers are registered on a specified portal,
students from OBC, SC, and ST communities in private (ii) maintaining a registry of jobseekers and
higher educational institutions (HEIs) is considerably employers, and (iii) coordinating with other
low. Key recommendations of the Committee include: agencies for facilitating skill development, career
(i) enacting a law for implementing reservation policies counselling and placement.
in private HEIs, (ii) providing reimbursement to private
 Placement Support Authorities: The central
HEIs for implementing reservation, (iii) providing
government will constitute a Central Placement
support to private HEIs for increasing seats, and (iv)
Support Authority. An officer of the rank of
strict enforcement of anti-discriminatory measures and
Additional Secretary or above, or the Director
constitution of grievance redressal mechanisms.
General of Employment under the Ministry will
For a PRS summary of the report, see here. serve as the head of the Authority. Key functions
of the Authority include: (i) registering private
Standing Committee on Education submits placement agencies operating in more than one
state/UT, and (ii) maintaining a centralised
report on teacher education and training
database of jobseekers and employers. It may
The Standing Committee on Education (Chair: Mr. suspend or cancel the registration of an agency
Digvijaya Singh) submitted its report on the ‘Review of upon violation of provisions under the Bill.
functioning of National Council for Teacher Education
 The state government may designate an authority
(NCTE) and initiatives taken to support teacher
under the Labour and Employment Department to
education and capacity building of teachers’. The
function as the State Placement Support Authority.
Committee observed issues such as: (i) vacancy of
It will be headed by an officer of the rank of the
officers posts and faculty in training institutes and
Secretary or above. Key functions of the State
schools, (ii) fragmented exit options under the
Authority include: (i) registering private placement
integrated teacher education program, (iii) self-financed
agencies, (ii) preventing fraudulent practices, (iii)
- 13 -
Monthly Policy Review – August 2025 PRS Legislative Research
facilitating data collection and analysis using the recommendations of the Committee include: (i)
portal, and (iv) grievance redressal. expediting FDI approval process to incentivise
investment by foreign companies, (ii) increasing
 Offences and Penalties: Providing placement
FSSAI’s efforts to enhance food safety
services without registering, and engaging in
compliance, (iii) exploring blacklisting of
fraudulent activities will be punishable with
individuals in place of units and factories in case of
imprisonment for up to three months with fine.
adulteration and non-compliance under Food
Failing to provide necessary information regarding
Safety and Standards Act, 2006, (iv) promoting
job placements and non-compliance with
participation of MSMEs on e-commerce platforms
conditions of registration will be punishable with
in rural and semi-urban areas, and (v) conducting
fine and temporary suspension of registration for
an updated study to assess post-harvest losses in
up to six months.
India.
Comments are invited until September 12, 2025.
For a PRS Summary of the report, see here.
Agriculture
Chemical and Fertilisers
Shrusti Singh (shrusti@prsindia.org)
Ayush Stephen Toppo (ayush@prsindia.org)
Standing Committee on Agriculture submits
Standing Committee on Chemical and
reports on several subjects
Fertilizers submits report on fertiliser PSUs
The Standing Committee on Agriculture, Animal
The Standing Committee on Chemicals and Fertilisers
Husbandry, and Food Processing (Chair: Mr. Charanjit
(Chair: Mr. Azad Kirti Jha) submitted its report on
Singh Channi) submitted reports on following subjects:
‘Matters pertaining to Disinvestment of Fertiliser
(i) “Development and Modernisation of Fishing
PSUs- a review’.59, The Committee noted delays of
Harbours”, (ii) “Role of NDDB for Protection and
several years in disinvestment of certain PSUs. It also
Development of Indigenous Cattle Breeds”, and (iii)
highlighted that fertiliser PSUs have old infrastructure.
“Initiatives taken in the Food Processing Sector under
Key recommendations of the Committee include: (i)
‘Make in India’ Program”.56, 57,58 Key observations and
ensuring a time-bound process for divestment of PSUs,
recommendations include:
(ii) providing financial support to PSUs such as lower
 Fishing harbours: The Committee noted that the interest rates on government loans, (iii) modernising
fisheries sector in India is growing at a higher their infrastructure with monetary support from the
annual average rate than the overall agriculture and central government, and (iv) monetising their unused
allied sector. To boost growth in the sector, the assets by leasing them.
Committee made the following key
For a PRS summary of the report, see here.
recommendations: (i) accelerating development
and modernisation of fishing harbours and fish
Standing Committee on Chemical and
landing centres, (ii) increasing financial assistance
Fertilizers submit report on food-grade plastics
offered to fishermen during the lean and fishing
ban period, (iii) increasing the fleet size of deep- The Standing Committee on Chemicals and Fertilisers
sea vessels, and (iv) extending benefits such as (Chair: Mr. Azad Kirti Jha) submitted its report on
those under PM-KISAN and free electricity to ‘Health hazards due to use of compromised or
fishers and fish farmers. substandard quality of food-grade plastics and their
exposure to extreme Indian climatic conditions’.60 Key
 Indigenous cattle breeds: Key recommendations
recommendations of the Committee include: (i)
of the Committee include: (i) addressing shortfalls
specifying an authority to check plastic contamination
in target achievement under the Rashtriya Gokul
in food during packaging and transportation, (ii)
Mission (a scheme for development and
conducting studies on the effect of plastic
conservation of indigenous bovine breeds), (ii)
contamination on food, and (iii) enhancing inspection
making genomic selection of indigenous cow
framework for food packaging.
breeds more inclusive, (iii) focusing on increasing
population of indigenous cow breeds with less than For a PRS summary of the report, see here.
50,000 populations, and (iv) increasing output and
distribution of semen stations.
 Food processing: The Committee observed that
the food processing industry has grown at a higher
annual average growth rate than the manufacturing
sector between 2013-14 and 2023-24. It identified
lack of adequate cold chain and storage facilities as
one of the main issues in the sector. Key
- 14 -
Monthly Policy Review – August 2025 PRS Legislative Research
Transport considering alternative funding models such as public
private partnerships for these infrastructure projects.
Atri Prasad Raut (atri@prsindia.org)
Standing Committee on Transport submits
report on safety in civil aviation Rural Development
The Standing Committee on Transport, Tourism and Vaishali Dhariwal (vaishali@prsindia.org)
Culture (Chair: Mr. Sanjay Kumar Jha) submitted its
report on ‘Overall Review of Safety in the Civil Standing Committee on Rural Development
Aviation Sector’.61 The Committee examined capacity and Panchayati Raj submits four reports
issues in regulatory institutions such as the Director
General of Civil Aviation (DGCA) and challenges The Standing Committee on Rural Development and
related to air traffic management and operations, and Panchayati Raj (Chair: Mr. Saptagiri Sankar Ulaka)
safety. The Committee recommended that DGCA submitted reports on: (i) Pradhan Mantri Gram Sadak
should be given statutory and administrative autonomy, Yojana, (ii) Clean and Green Villages, (iii) Effective
including that for recruitment. It observed that though Functioning of DISHA Committees, and (iv) Gram
the DGCA has been effective in detecting safety issues, Urja Swaraj. Key observations and recommendations
it has not been that effective in rectifying them. This by the Committee include:
has led to accumulation of unresolved issues, including
 Pradhan Mantri Gram Sadak Yojana: The
those related to aircraft fitness. In case of helicopters,
Committee reviewed implementation of PMGSY,
it recommended creating uniform national frameworks
which aims to provide all weather rural
for operations, and mandating terrain-specific training
connectivity. It noted that contractors often quote
and certification for pilots.
bids 25-30% below minimum bidding amount and
The Committee highlighted a shortage in air traffic recommended security deposits to safeguard road
controllers and increase in their workload. It quality. The Committee also noted poor
recommended implementing a fatigue risk management construction standards and use of substandard
system and expanding training capacity. The materials. It observed that some roads are poorly
Committee noted that aircraft induction in the country maintained despite contractors’ responsibility to
is outpacing airport development, creating capacity maintain them for five years post construction, and
mismatches at major hubs. It recommended developing recommended strict enforcement and blacklisting
a National Capacity Alignment Plan to synchronise of defaulters. It further recommended creating
infrastructure development with fleet expansion. designated teams for mandatory physical
inspections and regular video verification for better
For a PRS summary of the report, see here.
monitoring. The Committee also recommended
ensuring that roads reach unconnected habitations,
Standing Committee on Railways submits not just village peripheries. It also suggested
report on rail tunnels and bridges increasing road thickness to withstand heavy loads.
The Standing Committee on Railways (Chair: Mr. C M For a PRS summary of the report, see here.
Ramesh) submitted its fourth report on ‘Construction
 Clean and Green Village: Gram Panchayat
and Maintenance of Rail Tunnels and Bridges
Development Plans include a “Clean and Green
including Road Over Bridges / Road Under Bridges’.62
Village” theme that covers sanitation. The
The Committee examined the presence of bridge
Committee noted no dedicated scheme exists under
monitoring systems, underwater inspection capabilities,
the Ministry of Panchayati Raj for this theme. It
and measures taken for environmental sustainability.
recommended launching a sanitation focused
The Committee recommended the Ministry to develop
scheme with adequate funding support for
a database of bridges in disaster-prone areas and ensure
Panchayats. It further recommended that a ‘clean
real-time monitoring for timely warnings and
village fund’ should be created for direct fund
preventive action. It recommended expanding the use
transfers to Panchayats. The Committee observed
of remotely operated robotic vehicles for inspection of
that the financial assistance for household latrines
underwater bridge sub-structures.
remains fixed at Rs 12,000 despite rising
For safety in tunnels, the Committee recommended construction costs. It recommended increasing this
examining the possibility of providing evacuation amount and allowing Panchayats to top up from
arrangements or escape tunnels for tunnels longer than own resources. It also recommended long-term
three kilometres. Taking note of delay in construction maintenance contracts for community toilets, with
of bridges, the Committee recommended that city- regular cleaning and water supply.
specific action plans should be prepared in
 Effective functioning of DISHA Committees:
collaboration with state and local authorities. It
The Committee reviewed the functioning of
observed that the Ministry should strengthen
district and state-level District Development
coordination with state governments for timely consent
Coordination and Monitoring Committees (DISHA
and support for land acquisition. It also recommended
- 15 -
Monthly Policy Review – August 2025 PRS Legislative Research
Committees) which oversee implementation of 96 Communications
central schemes across 35 Ministries. It found
gaps in regularity of meetings and recommended Ayush Stephen Toppo (ayush@prsindia.org)
that district committees meet every quarter and
state committees meet twice a year with timely Standing Committee on Communications
circulation of agenda and action-taken reports. It submits report on real estate management in
also recommended improved use of the DISHA the Department of Posts
dashboard for real-time monitoring and
The Standing Committee on Communications and
coordination. The Committee also recommended
Information Technology (Chair: Dr. Nishikant Dubey)
timely reimbursement of meeting expenses and
presented its report on ‘Real Estate Management in the
greater involvement of local representatives,
Department of Posts’.63 The Committee observed that
including women.
83% of post offices are housed in rented buildings. It
 Gram Urja Swaraj: The Committee noted an uneven regional distribution in the number of
recommended creation of a new scheme “Gram new buildings. The Department holds 1,460 vacant
Urja Swaraj” to promote renewable energy in rural plots, of which 276 plots are encroached. The
areas. It further suggested establishing a dedicated Committee further observed that the Department has
Rural Renewable Energy Fund to finance such not conducted any exercise to determine the potential
initiatives. To ensure reliability, the Committee for monetisation of its land assets.
recommended enhancing the quality and durability
Key recommendations of the Committee include: (i)
of solar films used in installations. It also
building low-cost postal infrastructure to reduce
highlighted the need for upgrading battery
dependence on rental properties, (ii) involving local
technology to improve storage and efficiency of
administration and police to prevent illegal
renewable energy systems. The Committee
encroachments in vacant plots, (iii) developing
recommended that Panchayats should act as
monetisation strategy for postal assets, and (iv)
producers of renewable energy and sell surplus
renovating and reconstructing staff quarters.
power to generate revenue. Further, it
recommended training local youth in installation For a PRS summary of the report, see here.
and maintenance of solar panels.
1 Resolution of the Monetary Policy Committee, August 4 to 6, 2025, https://rbidocs.rbi.org.in/rdocs/PressRelease/PDFs/PR951E320767D
Monetary Policy Statement 2025-26, Reserve Bank of India, August E8D04E28B8A5C94615F388C9.PDF.
6, 2025, 11 “Framework for Responsible and Ethical Enablement of Artificial
https://www.rbi.org.in/Scripts/BS_PressReleaseDisplay.aspx?prid=6 Intelligence (FREE-AI)”, Reserve Bank of India, August 13, 2025,
0957. https://rbidocs.rbi.org.in/rdocs//PublicationReport/Pdfs/FREEAIR130
2 Quarterly Estimates of Gross Domestic Product for the First Quarter 820250A24FF2D4578453F824C72ED9F5D5851.PDF.
(April-June) of 2025-26, Ministry of Statistics and Programme 12 Consultation Paper on review of requirement of Minimum Public
Implementation, August 29, 2025, Offer and timelines to comply with Minimum Public Shareholding
https://www.pib.gov.in/PressReleasePage.aspx?PRID=2161834. for issuers in terms of Securities Contracts (Regulation) Rules, 1957,
3 “India's Index of industrial production records growth of 3.5% in https://www.sebi.gov.in/reports-and-statistics/reports/aug-
July 2025”, Press Information Bureau, Ministry of Statistics and 2025/consultation-paper-on-review-of-requirement-of-minimum-
Programme Implementation, August 28, 2025, public-offer-and-timelines-to-comply-with-minimum-public-
https://www.pib.gov.in/PressReleasePage.aspx?PRID=2161516. shareholding-for-issuers-in-terms-of-securities-contracts-regulation-
4 “India's IIP records a growth of 4.2% in the June 2024”, Press rules-1957_96128.html.
Information Bureau, Ministry of Statistics and Programme 13 Consultation paper on amendments to provisions relating to related
Implementation, August 12, 2024, party transactions under SEBI (LODR) Regulations, 2015 and
https://pib.gov.in/PressReleasePage.aspx?PRID=2044601. circulars thereunder, https://www.sebi.gov.in/reports-and-
5 The Income-Tax (No.2) Bill, 2025, statistics/reports/aug-2025/consultation-paper-on-amendments-to-
https://prsindia.org/files/bills_acts/bills_parliament/2025/Bill_as_pas provisions-relating-to-related-party-transactions-under-sebi-lodr-
sed_by_LS_Income_Tax_(No.2)_Bill.pdf. regulations-2015-and-circulars-thereunder_95824.html.
6 The Taxation Laws (Amendment) Bill, 2025, 14 Consultation paper on review of SEBI (Stock Brokers)
https://prsindia.org/files/bills_acts/bills_parliament/2025/Bill_Text- Regulations, 1992, https://www.sebi.gov.in/reports-and-
Taxation_Laws_Bill_2025.pdf. statistics/reports/aug-2025/consultation-paper-on-review-of-sebi-
stock-brokers-regulations-1992_96050.html.
7 The Income Tax Act, 1961,
https://incometaxindia.gov.in/Documents/income-tax-act-1961-as- 15 Report No. 26, ‘Roadmap for Indian Economic Growth in Light of
amended-by-finance-act-2025.pdf. Global Economic and Geopolitical Circumstances’, Standing
Committee on Finance, Lok Sabha, August 19, 2025,
8 The Insolvency and Bankruptcy Code (Amendment) Bill, 2025,
https://sansad.in/getFile/lsscommittee/Finance/18_Finance_26.pdf?so
https://prsindia.org/files/bills_acts/bills_parliament/2025/The_Insolve
urce=loksabhadocs.
ncy_and_Bankruptcy_Code_(Amendment)_Bill,2025.pdf.
16 Report No. 25, ‘Evolving Role of Competition Commission of
9 The Insolvency and Bankruptcy Code, 2016,
India in the Economy, Particularly the Digital Landscape’, Standing
https://www.indiacode.nic.in/bitstream/123456789/15479/1/the_insol
Committee on Finance, Lok Sabha, August 11, 2025,
vency_and_bankruptcy_code%2C_2016.pdf.
https://sansad.in/getFile/lsscommittee/Finance/18_Finance_25.pdf?so
10 Discussion Paper on Review of Monetary Policy Framework,
urce=loksabhadocs.
Reserve Bank of India, August 21, 2025,
17 The Constitution (One Hundred and Thirtieth Amendment) Bill,
2025,
- 16 -
Monthly Policy Review – August 2025 PRS Legislative Research
29, 2025,
https://www.pib.gov.in/PressReleasePage.aspx?PRID=2162017.
https://prsindia.org/files/bills_acts/bills_parliament/2025/Constitution
_(130th_Amendment)_Bill,2025.pdf. 39 “Prime Minister's bilateral meeting with Chinese President Xi
Jinping”, Press Information Bureau, Prime Minister’s Office, August
18 Government of Union Territories (Amendment) Bill, 2025,
31, 2025,
https://prsindia.org/files/bills_acts/bills_parliament/2025/Government
https://www.pib.gov.in/PressReleasePage.aspx?PRID=2162428.
_of_UT_(A)%20Bill,2025.pdf.
40 “India and Eurasian Economic Union sign Terms of Reference to
19 The Jammu and Kashmir Reorganisation (Amendment) Bill, 2025,
launch FTA negotiations”, Press Release, Ministry of Commerce and
https://prsindia.org/files/bills_acts/bills_parliament/2025/J&K_Reorg
Industry, Press Information Bureau, August 20, 2025,
anisation_(A)_Bill,2025.pdf.
https://www.pib.gov.in/PressReleasePage.aspx?PRID=2158480
20 The Readjustment of Representation of Scheduled Tribes in
41 Report No. 8, Evaluation of India’s Indian Ocean Strategy,
Assembly Constituencies of the State of Goa Bill, 2024,
Standing Committee on External Affairs, August 2025,
https://sansad.in/getFile/BillsTexts/LSBillTexts/Asintroduced/goa852
https://sansad.in/getFile/lsscommittee/External%20Affairs/18_Extern
024124017PM.pdf?source=legislation.
al_Affairs_8.pdf?source=loksabhadocs.
21 Report no. 254, “Cyber Crime – Ramifications, Protection and
42 The National Sports Governance Bill, 2025, Ministry of Youth and
Prevention”, Parliamentary Standing Committee on Home Affairs,
Sports Affairs, July 23, 2025,
August 2, 2025,
https://sansad.in/getFile/BillsTexts/LSBillTexts/Asintroduced/sports7
https://sansad.in/getFile/rsnew/Committee_site/Committee_File/Repo
232025123349PM.pdf?source=legislation.
rtFile/15/197/254_2025_8_12.pdf?source=rajyasabha.
43 The Promotion and Regulation of Online Gaming Bill, 2025,
22 The Jan Vishwas (Amendment of Provisions) Bill, 2025,
https://sansad.in/getFile/BillsTexts/LSBillTexts/PassedLoksabha/gam
https://prsindia.org/files/bills_acts/bills_parliament/2025/Bill_Text-
ing%20eng8212025103018AM.pdf?source=legislation.
Jan_Vishwas_(Amendment_of_Provisions)_Bill_2025.pdf.
44 The National Anti-Doping (Amendment) Bill, 2025
23 “Cabinet approves restructuring & extension of lending period
beyond 31.12.2024 of PM Street Vendors Aatmanirbhar Nidhi (PM https://prsindia.org/files/bills_acts/bills_parliament/2025/National_A
SVANidhi) Scheme”, Press Information Bureau, Cabinet, August 27, nti-Doping(A)_Bill_2025.pdf.
2025, 45 The National Anti-Doping Act, 2022,
https://www.pib.gov.in/PressReleasePage.aspx?PRID=2161157. https://prsindia.org/files/bills_acts/acts_parliament/2022/The%20Nati
24 Scheme Guidelines for PM Street Vendor’s Aatmanirbhar Nidhi onal%20Anti%20Doping%20Act%202022.pdf.
(PM SVANidhi), Ministry of Housing and Urban Affairs, June 1, 46 Report No. 369, ‘Review of functioning and performance of Sports
2020, Authority of India (SAI) and Khelo India’, Standing Committee on
https://mohua.gov.in/upload/uploadfiles/files/Scheme_guidelines_%2 Education, Women, Children, Youth and Sports, Rajya Sabha,
0PMSAVnidhi%20_%20English.pdf. August 20, 2025,
25 “The Ministry of Heavy Industries extends the tenure of the PM E- https://sansad.in/getFile/rsnew/Committee_site/Committee_File/Repo
DRIVE Scheme by 2 years from 31 March 2026 to 31 March 2028”, rtFile/16/198/369_2025_8_12.pdf?source=rajyasabha.
Press Release, Ministry of Heavy Industries, Press Information 47 “Cabinet approves continuation of Targeted Subsidy for Pradhan
Bureau, August 08, 2025, Mantri Ujjwala Yojana Consumers for 2025-26 at Rs 12,000 crore”,
https://www.pib.gov.in/PressReleasePage.aspx?PRID=2154408. Press Information Bureau, Union Cabinet, August 8, 2025,
26 The Mines and Minerals (Development and Regulation) https://www.pib.gov.in/PressReleasePage.aspx?PRID=2154117.
Amendment Bill, 2025, Ministry of 48 “Uniform Renewable Energy Tariff (URET) Mechanism -
Mines, https://prsindia.org/billtrack/the-mines-and-minerals- dissolution of Solar power central Pool and solar-wind Hybrid central
development-and-regulation-amendment-bill-2025. Pool”, Ministry of Power, August 1, 2025,
27 Mines and Minerals (Development and Regulation) Act, 1957, https://powermin.gov.in/sites/default/files/Uniform_Renewable_Ener
https://prsindia.org/billtrack/the-mines-and-minerals-development- gy_Tariff_Mechanism_dissolution_of_Solar_power_central_Pool_an
and-regulation-amendment-bill-2023. d_sola_wind_Hybrid_central_Pool.pdf.
28 The Merchant Shipping Bill, 2024, 49 “Approval of Procedure for Implementation of Uniform Renewable
https://prsindia.org/files/bills_acts/bills_parliament/2024/Merchant_S Energy Tariff”, Ministry of Power, October 25, 2023,
hipping_Bill,_2024.pdf. https://powermin.gov.in/sites/default/files/Approval_of_Procedure_f
or_Implementation_of_Uniform_Renewable_Energy.pdf.
29 The Merchant Shipping Act, 1958,
https://dgshipping.gov.in/WriteReadData/userfiles/file/MS%20Act,% 50 “Cabinet approves Four New Components under the existing
201958%20-%20With%20Hyperlinks.pdf. Central Sector Scheme of Special Development Packages (SDPs) for
Assam and Tripura with a total outlay of Rs.4,250 crore”, Press
30 The Coastal Shipping Bill, 2024, https://prsindia.org/billtrack/the-
Release, Cabinet, Press Information Bureau, August 8, 2025,
coastal-shipping-bill-2024.
https://www.pib.gov.in/PressReleasePage.aspx?PRID=2154123.
31 The Indian Ports Bill, 2025,
51 The Indian Institutes of Management (Amendment) Bill, 2025,
https://prsindia.org/files/bills_acts/bills_parliament/2025/Text_Indian
https://sansad.in/getFile/BillsTexts/LSBillTexts/Asintroduced/iim
_Ports_Bill_2025.pdf.
eng8182025122705PM.pdf?source=legislation.
32 The Indian Ports Act, 1908,
52 “Cabinet approves Budgetary Support for Multidisciplinary
https://www.indiacode.nic.in/bitstream/123456789/2344/1/A1908-
Education and Research improvement in Technical Education
15.pdf.
(MERITE) Scheme with an outlay of Rs. 4200 crores”, Press
33 The Carriage of Goods by Sea Bill, 2024, Release, Ministry of Education, Press Information Bureau, August
https://prsindia.org/billtrack/the-carriage-of-goods-by-sea-bill-2024. 08, 2025,
34 The Indian Carriage of Goods by Sea Act, 1925, https://www.pib.gov.in/PressReleasePage.aspx?PRID=2154138.
https://www.indiacode.nic.in/bitstream/123456789/2384/1/AAA1925 53 Learning Outcomes based Curriculum Framework (LOCF),
____26.pdf. University Grants Commission, August 20, 2025,
35 “India - Japan Joint Vision for the Next Decade: Eight Directions https://www.ugc.gov.in/pdfnews/5756506_Public-Notice-LOCF.pdf.
to Steer the Special Strategic and Global Partnership”, Press 54 Report No. 369, ‘Review of functioning and performance of Sports
Information Bureau, Prime Minister’s Office, August 29, 2025, Authority of India (SAI) and Khelo India’, Standing Committee on
https://www.pib.gov.in/PressReleasePage.aspx?PRID=2161986. Education, Women, Children, Youth and Sports, Rajya Sabha,
36 “List of Outcomes: Prime Minister’s Visit to Japan”, Press August 20, 2025,
Information Bureau, Prime Minister’s Office, August 29, 2025, https://sansad.in/getFile/rsnew/Committee_site/Committee_File/Repo
https://www.pib.gov.in/PressReleasePage.aspx?PRID=2161945. rtFile/16/198/369_2025_8_12.pdf?source=rajyasabha.
37 “Fact Sheet : India-Japan Economic Security Cooperation”, Press 55 The Draft Private Placement Agency (Regulation) Bill, 2025,
Information Bureau, Prime Minister’s Office, August 29, 2025, https://prsindia.org/files/parliamentry-announcement/2025-09-
https://www.pib.gov.in/PressReleasePage.aspx?PRID=2162043. 12/draft_private_placement_Agency_(Regulation)_bill.pdf.
38 Joint Declaration on Security Cooperation between India and
Japan, Press Information Bureau, Prime Minister’s Office, August
- 17 -
Monthly Policy Review – August 2025 PRS Legislative Research
conditions’, Lok Sabha, August 20, 2025,
https://sansad.in/getFile/lsscommittee/Chemicals%20&%20Fertilizer
56 Report No. 20, “Development and Modernisation of Fishing
s/18_Chemicals_And_Fertilizers_13.pdf?source=loksabhadocs.
Harbours”, Standing Committee on Agriculture, Animal Husbandry,
and Food Processing, Lok Sabha, August 20, 2025, 61 Three hundred eightieth report of the Standing Committee on
https://sansad.in/getFile/lsscommittee/Agriculture,%20Animal%20H Transport, Tourism and Culture, Rajya Sabha, August 20, 2025,
usbandry%20and%20Food%20Processing/18_Agriculture_Animal_ https://sansad.in/getFile/rsnew/Committee_site/Committee_File/Repo
Husbandry_and_Food_Processing_20.pdf?source=loksabhadocs. rtFile/20/202/380_2025_8_12.pdf?source=rajyasabha
57 Report No. 14, “Role of National Dairy Development Board 62 Fourth Report of the Standing Committee on Railways, Lok Sabha,
(NDDB) for Protection and Development of Indigenous Cattle August 11, 2024, https://sansad.in/8f1e6e20-a34e-412b-8e09-
Breeds”, Standing Committee on Agriculture, Animal Husbandry, a0ed47b48cb7.
and Food Processing, Lok Sabha, August 20, 2025, 63 Report No. 20, Standing Committee on Communications and
https://sansad.in/getFile/lsscommittee/Agriculture,%20Animal%20H Information Technology, Lok Sabha, August 19, 2025,
usbandry%20and%20Food%20Processing/18_Agriculture_Animal_ https://sansad.in/getFile/lsscommittee/Communications%20and%20I
Husbandry_and_Food_Processing_14.pdf?source=loksabhadocs. nformation%20Technology/18_Communications_and_Information_
58 Report No. 21, “Initiatives taken in Food Processing Sector under Technology_20.pdf?source=loksabhadocs.
'Make In India' Program”, Standing Committee on Agriculture, DISCLAIMER: This document is being furnished to you for your
Animal Husbandry, and Food Processing, Lok Sabha, August 20, information. You may choose to reproduce or redistribute this
2025, report for non-commercial purposes in part or in full to any other
https://sansad.in/getFile/lsscommittee/Agriculture,%20Animal%20H person with due acknowledgement of PRS Legislative Research
usbandry%20and%20Food%20Processing/18_Agriculture_Animal_ (“PRS”). The opinions expressed herein are entirely those of the
Husbandry_and_Food_Processing_21.pdf?source=loksabhadocs. author(s). PRS makes every effort to use reliable and
59 Report No. 12, Standing Committee on Chemicals and Fertilisers: comprehensive information, but PRS does not represent that the
‘Matters pertaining to Disinvestment of Fertiliser PSUs- a review’, contents of the report are accurate or complete. PRS is an
Lok Sabha, August 20, 2025, independent, not-for-profit group. This document has been
https://sansad.in/getFile/lsscommittee/Chemicals%20&%20Fertilizer prepared without regard to the objectives or opinions of those
s/18_Chemicals_And_Fertilizers_12.pdf?source=loksabhadocs. who may receive it.
60 Report No. 13, Standing Committee on Chemicals and Fertilisers:
‘Health Hazards due to use of compromised or substandard quality of
food-grade plastics and their exposure to extreme Indian climatic
- 18 -
