Monthly Policy Review
December 2025
Highlights of this Issue
Winter Session 2025 concludes (p. 2)
The winter session of Parliament concluded on December 19, 2025. The session had 15 sittings. Nine Bills
were introduced during this session, out of which seven were passed, and two were referred to Committees.
Repo rate reduced to 5.25% (p. 2)
RBI’s Monetary Policy Committee voted to reduce the repo rate from 5.5% to 5.25%. The standing deposit
facility rate, marginal standing facility rate and bank rate were also reduced by 0.25%.
Parliament passes a Bill to modify the legal framework for nuclear energy (p. 3)
The Bill replaces the Atomic Energy Act, 1962 and the Civil Liability for Nuclear Damage Act, 2010. It allows
private participation in plant operation and fuel handling, and alters the right of recourse against suppliers.
Parliament passes Viksit Bharat - G RAM G Bill to replace MGNREGA (p. 5)
The Bill increases right to employment for a rural household from 100 to 125 days. Funding will be shared
between the Centre and states in 60:40 ratio. States will bear additional expense above a normative allocation.
Parliament passes a Bill to amend the insurance laws (p. 5)
The Bill increases FDI limit in Indian insurance companies from 74% to 100%. It lowers net-owned fund
requirements for foreign re-insurers. It also grants additional powers to IRDAI.
The Securities Markets Code, 2025 introduced in Lok Sabha (p. 6)
The Code seeks to consolidate provisions of the SEBI Act, 1992, the Depositories Act, 1996, and the Securities
Contracts (Regulations) Act, 1956.
The Viksit Bharat Shiksha Adhishthan Bill, 2025 introduced in Lok Sabha (p. 7)
The Bill sets up a regulatory body for higher education to replace UGC, AICTE, and NCTE. The new
regulatory body will not have any powers regarding funding to higher education institutions.
Select Committee submits report on the IBC (Amendment) Bill, 2025 (p. 7)
Key recommendations include barring Resolution Professionals from being appointed as liquidators, imposing a
timeline for appeal disposal by NCLAT, and specifying details for cross-border insolvency.
Russian President visits India for bilateral talks (p. 8)
The two countries re-affirmed their support for strengthening the strategic partnership. They agreed to expand
cooperation in areas such as nuclear energy, space, military, science and technology, and maritime transport.
India and Oman signed a comprehensive economic partnership agreement (p. 8)
Oman will offer zero-duty access on over 98% of its tariff lines, covering most Indian exports. India will cut
tariffs on about 78% of its tariff lines, covering nearly 95% of imports from Oman by value.
Comments invited on draft Rules under the four Labour Codes (p. 9)
These Rules specify details such as weekly working hours, detailed procedures for social security benefits,
manner of calculation of minimum wage and floor wage, and the manner of recognition of trade unions.
Standing Committees of Parliament submitted reports
Standing Committees of Parliament submitted various reports. These include working of the Insolvency and
Bankruptcy Code and Land Acquisition Act, self-sufficiency in fertilisers, and self-reliance in minerals.
January 2, 2026
PRS Legislative Research ■ Institute for Policy Research Studies
3rd Floor, Gandharva Mahavidyalaya ■ 212, Deen Dayal Upadhyaya Marg ■ New Delhi – 110002
Tel: (011) 23234801, 43434035 ■ www.prsindia.org
Monthly Policy Review – December 2025 PRS Legislative Research
Parliament September) of 2025-26, lower than USD 20.9 billion
(2.2% of GDP) in the corresponding quarter of 2024-
Ruchira Sakalle (ruchira@prsindia.org) 25.2 In the first quarter (April-June) of 2025-26,
current account deficit of USD 2.7 billion (0.3% of
Winter Session 2025 concludes GDP) was recorded. Foreign exchange reserves
decreased by USD 10.9 billion during the second
The Winter Session of Parliament was held from
quarter of 2025-26.
December 1 to December 19, 2025. During the
session, nine Bills were introduced. Two of these Bills Table 1: Balance of payments, Q2 2025-26 (USD
were referred to Committees. These are the Securities billion)
Markets Code, 2025, and the Viksit Bharat Shiksha Q2 Q1 Q2
Adhishthan Bill, 2025 (establishes a regulator for 2024-25 2025-26 2025-26
higher education). a. Exports 100.6 112.7 109.4
b. Imports 189.2 181.6 196.8
Seven Bills were passed. These include a Bill to
modify the legal framework for nuclear energy, and c. Trade balance (a-b) -88.5 -68.9 -87.4
another Bill to replace the MGNREGS Act. A Bill to d. Net services 44.5 47.9 50.9
amend insurance laws was also passed. Further, two e. Other transfers 23.2 18.2 24.2
Bills were passed to raise excise duty on tobacco f. Current account (c+d+e) -20.9 -2.7 -12.3
products and levy a cess on pan masala. g. Capital account 39.9 8.0 0.6
h. Errors and omissions -0.4 -0.7 0.8
The Supplementary Demands for Grants for 2025-26
i. Change in reserves (f+g+h) 18.6 4.5 -10.9
was also discussed and passed.
Sources: RBI; PRS.
For more details on the legislative business transacted
during this session, see here. Industrial production grows by 4.3% in the
second quarter of 2025-26
For more details on functioning of Parliament during
the session, see here. Shania Ali (shania@prsindia.org)
The Index of Industrial Production (IIP) grew by 4.3%
in the second quarter (July-September) of 2025-26,
Macroeconomic Development
higher than the same period in 2024-25 (an increase of
2.7%).3,4 Note that manufacturing (78%) has the
RBI reduces repo rate to 5.25% highest weightage in the calculation of the IIP,
followed by mining (14%) and electricity (8%).
Shania Ali (shania@prsindia.org)
Manufacturing increased by 5.1% in the second quarter
The Reserve Bank of India’s (RBI) Monetary Policy of 2025-26. Electricity registered an increase of 3.7%,
Committee (MPC) voted to reduce the policy repo rate while mining decreased by 0.5%. In the corresponding
(the rate at which RBI lends money to banks for short- quarter of 2024-25, mining had decreased by 0.1%.
term needs) from 5.5% to 5.25%.1 Other decisions of
Figure 1: Growth in IIP (%, year-on-year)
the MPC include:
8%
 The standing deposit facility rate (the rate at which 5.1%
6% 4.3%
RBI borrows from banks without giving collateral) 3.7%
4%
has been reduced from 5.25% to 5.0%.
2%
 The marginal standing facility rate (rate at which 0%
banks can borrow additional overnight funds from -2% -0.5%
RBI) and the bank rate (rate at which RBI lends -4%
money to commercial banks for the long term) -6%
have also been reduced from 5.75% to 5.5%. -8%
IIP Mining Mfg Electricity
 RBI increased its projection for real GDP growth
for 2025-26 from 6.8% to 7.3%.
Jul-25 Aug-25 Sep-25 Jul-Sep 25
 The MPC decided to continue with its neutral
Sources: Ministry of Statistics and Programme Implementation; PRS.
stance.
Current account deficit at 1.3% of GDP in the Standing Committee submits report on review
second quarter of 2025-26 of the National Statistical Commission
Shania Ali (shania@prsindia.org) Vedika Bhanote (vedika@prsindia.org)
India recorded a current account deficit of USD 12.3 The Standing Committee on Finance (Chair: Mr.
billion (1.3% of GDP) in the second quarter (July- Bhartruhari Mahtab) presented its report on
- 2 -
Monthly Policy Review – December 2025 PRS Legislative Research
‘Performance Review of National Statistical ranging from Rs 100 crore to Rs 3,000 crore based
Commission (NSC)’.5 NSC began functioning in July on power capacity.
2006. Its purpose is to serve as a nodal body for
 Atomic Energy Regulatory Board: The Bill
matters related to statistics and statistical systems and
provides statutory recognition to the Atomic
ensure co-ordination between ministries and agencies.
Energy Regulatory Board (AERB). The Board
Key recommendations of the Committee include: (i)
will take measures to ensure safe use of radiation
establishing NSC as an autonomous body for all
and nuclear energy.
statistical activities with full statutory backing, (ii)
developing a national standards framework on data For a PRS summary of the Bill, see here.
collection, sampling, and reporting protocols applicable
to both public and private sector, (iii) establishing a The Petroleum and Natural Gas Rules, 2025
statistical audit function and standardised audit notified
guidelines, (iv) refining GDP data to capture all
economic activity, especially within the unorganised Ayush Stephen Toppo (ayush@prsindia.org)
sector, and (v) pursuing international collaborations for
joint research initiatives. The Ministry of Petroleum and Natural Gas notified the
Petroleum and Natural Gas Rules, 2025.9 These Rules
For a PRS summary of the report, see here. have been notified under the Oilfields (Regulations and
Development) Act, 1948.10 The Act provides for
regulation of oilfields and development of mineral oil
resources. These Rules replace the Petroleum and
Energy
Natural Gas Rules, 1959 which specify the manner of
issuing licences and leases with respect to petroleum
Parliament passes a Bill to modify the legal and natural gas, and rights and obligations of
framework for nuclear energy licence/lease holders.11 Key features of the 2025 Rules
include:
Ayush Stephen Toppo (ayush@prsindia.org)
 Petroleum lease: Petroleum lease will be granted
The Sustainable Harnessing and Advancement of by: (i) the state government for mineral oil
Nuclear Energy for Transforming India Bill, 2025 was underlying land within its jurisdiction, and (ii) the
passed by Parliament.6 The Bill replaces the Atomic central government for resources in offshore areas.
Energy Act, 1962 and the Civil Liability for Nuclear The lease will provide exclusive right to explore,
Damage Act, 2010.7,8 The 1962 Act provided for the develop, and produce mineral oils. Earlier,
development and use of atomic energy, and the 2010 separate concessions were issued for exploration
Act provided a framework for assigning liability and and production. A lease will be valid for a period
compensation in case of a nuclear incident. Key between four years and 30 years. The lease may
changes include: be extended till the end of economic life of the
oilfield, in one or more instalments. The lessee
 Licence to non-government entities: The 1962 may also undertake activities such as exploration
Act permitted only central government entities or and generation from renewable energy sources,
companies to mine atomic minerals or produce and exploration and production of hydrogen in the
nuclear energy. The Bill empowers the central leased area.
government to issue licences to Indian private
companies or their joint ventures with government  Rights with respect to data: All data obtained as
entities for generating nuclear energy and handling a result of operations will be the property of the
nuclear fuel. central government. A lessee will have right to use
data free of cost and retain for its own purposes.
 Operator’s right of recourse: The 2010 Act gave The central government may disclose data to
operators a legal right to recover some or all of the public, other than any data held to be proprietary.
compensation paid. This right could be exercised:
(i) when such rights are provided in a contract, (ii)  Greenhouse gas emissions: Every lessee must
where the incident arises due to the supply of monitor and reduce greenhouse gas emissions.
defective equipment or materials, and (iii) when Lessees may undertake projects for geological
the incident is caused by a deliberate act with the storage of emissions within the leased area, after
intent to cause damage. The Bill removes the obtaining authorisation from the central
ground of supply of defective equipment or government.
materials.
 Sharing of infrastructure: Two or more lessees
 Liability for nuclear damage: The 2010 Act may jointly develop or share infrastructure
specified a maximum liability of the operator at Rs facilities, as per mutually agreed terms and
1,500 crore for a nuclear reactor with thermal conditions.
power capacity of 10 megawatt or above. The Bill
specifies a tiered structure, with liability limit
- 3 -
Monthly Policy Review – December 2025 PRS Legislative Research
CERC notifies guidelines for virtual power wafers, (iii) reducing delays in land clearances by
purchase agreements adopting uniform compensation guidelines for right of
way by states, (iv) a single window clearance
Ayush Stephen Toppo (ayush@prsindia.org)
mechanism for easy identification of issues and time-
bound resolution, and (v) acceleration of solar power
The Central Electricity Regulatory Commission
schemes such as PM Surya Ghar Yojana and PM-
(CERC) notified guidelines for Virtual Power Purchase
KUSUM.
Agreements (VPPAs).12 These agreements are
intended to help designated consumers meet their For a PRS summary of the report, see here.
Renewable Energy Consumption Obligation (RCO).
This obligation was introduced through an amendment Estimates Committee submits report on
to the Energy Conservation Act, 2001 in 2022. It implementation of PM-KUSUM and PM Surya
requires certain consumers to source a minimum Ghar schemes
percentage of electricity requirement from non-fossil
Ayush Stephen Toppo (ayush@prsindia.org)
sources. Designated consumers include distribution
companies, open access consumers (who procure
The Estimates Committee (Chair: Dr. Sanjay Jaiswal)
electricity directly from generators), and captive users
presented its report on “Implementation of Pradhan
(who generate electricity for their own use).
Mantri Kisan Urjan Suraksha Evam Utthaan
Currently, RCO may be fulfilled by: (i) utilising Madhabhiyan (PM-KUSUM) and PM Surya Ghar:
electricity from non-fossil sources, or (ii) purchasing Muft Bijli Yojana”.14 PM-KUSUM aims to promote
Renewable Energy Certificates (REC) from generators adoption of solar energy in the agricultural sector. PM
through competitive bidding on power exchanges. Surya Ghar seeks to promote rooftop solar panels
RECs are issued to generators for supplying electricity among households.
from renewable sources. A VPPA will provide a third
In case of PM-KUSUM, the Committee recommended:
option to fulfil the obligation. A VPPA is a financial
(i) increasing central financial assistance for
contract in which electricity is not physically
decentralised solar power plants to address low uptake,
exchanged between contracting parties. Key features
(ii) modifying the scheme to allow higher capacity
of the guidelines include:
solar pumps in areas with lower groundwater levels,
 Design of VPPA: A VPPA will be a bilateral and (iii) adopting agrivoltaics which allows agriculture
contract between a renewable energy generator and and solar power generation on the same piece of land.
a designated consumer for at least one year. Under Key recommendations on PM KUSUM include: (i)
this contract, the generator will earmark RE addressing inter-state disparity in empanelment of
capacity for that designated consumer. The vendors, and reducing performance bank guarantee
generator will transfer to the designated consumer amount to support it, (ii) extending coverage to single
the RECs earned from the sale of electricity up to dwelling units in agricultural fields and beneficiaries of
the earmarked capacity. RECs for VPPAs may be Pradhan Mantri Awas Yojana, (iii) speedy disposal of
earned by sale through a power exchange, or other loan applications, and (iv) addressing shortages of
such modes authorised by CERC. VPPAs will be various components in far-flung areas.
non-tradeable and non-transferrable.
For a PRS summary of the report, see here.
 Payment terms: The generator and the designated
consumer will decide a mutually agreed price. CAG releases audit report on the Deen Dayal
Difference between the price realised through sale
Upadhyaya Gram Jyoti Yojana and
and the pre-agreed price will be settled bilaterally
SAUBHAGYA scheme
in accordance with agreed terms and conditions.
Vedika Bhanote (vedika@prsindia.org)
 Dispute settlement: The guidelines specify that a
dispute will be mutually settled as per the contract.
The Comptroller and Auditor General of India (CAG)
released its audit report on ‘Deen Dayal Upadhyaya
Standing Committee submits report on review
Gram Jyoti Yojana (DDUGJY) and Pradhan Mantri
of solar power projects Sahaj Bijli Har Ghar Yojana (SAUBHAGYA)’.15
Vedika Bhanote (vedika@prsindia.org)
DDUGJY was launched in 2014 to strengthen rural
electricity distribution. SAUBHAGYA was launched
in 2017 to provide last-mile connectivity and electricity
The Standing Committee on Energy (Chair: Mr.
to all unelectrified rural households.
Shrirang Appa Barne) presented its report on
‘Performance Evaluation of Solar Power Projects in the CAG noted that actual expenditure under both schemes
Country’.13 Key recommendations include: (i) was lower than the sanctioned expenditure. Under
providing grants to research institutions to conduct DDUGJY, actual expenditure was Rs 64,495 crore
solar storage-related R&D for cost reduction, (ii) against a sanction of Rs 75,893 crore. Under
introducing dedicated production-linked incentive SAUBHAGYA scheme, actual expenditure was Rs
schemes for manufacturing of polysilicon, ingots, and 9,246 crore against a sanction of Rs 14,082 crore.
- 4 -
Monthly Policy Review – December 2025 PRS Legislative Research
Under DDUGJY, as of March 2022, 7,833 agricultural  Pause on work during agricultural season: The
feeders were separated against a sanction of 9,019 and Bill empowers the state government to pause work
cabinet approval for 16,500. Under SAUBHAGYA, under the programme for a period of up to 60 days
1.52 crore households were electrified against an initial in a financial year during peak agricultural seasons,
target of three crore households. Under both these including sowing and harvesting. The 2005 Act
schemes, detailed project reports were prepared without did not contain any such provisions.
field surveys. It highlighted gaps in quality assurance
 Technology integration: The Bill provides for
under the two schemes such as delay in inspections and
using technologies for monitoring scheme
resolution of issues identified during inspections.
implementation. These include: (i) biometric
Key recommendations include: (i) collecting accurate authentication for transactions, (ii) geospatial
beneficiary data before launch of a scheme to avoid technology for planning, and (iii) mobile
gaps in targets and achievement, (ii) ensuring field application based dashboards for real-time tracking
surveys before preparing detailed project reports to of work under the scheme.
address variance in execution, (iii) planning fund
For a PRS summary of the Bill, see here.
allocations based on verified beneficiary lists, (iv)
undertaking extra budgetary borrowing only as per
Standing Committee submits report on
assessed requirements, and (v) ensuring adherence to
implementation of land acquisition law
quality assurance frameworks in future schemes.
For a PRS summary of the report, see here. The Standing Committee on Rural Development and
Panchayati Raj (Chair: Mr. Saptagiri Sankar Ulaka)
presented its report on ‘Right to Fair Compensation and
Transparency in Land Acquisition, Rehabilitation and
Rural Development Resettlement Act, 2013 (LARR Act) - Implementation
and Effectiveness’. The Committee observed
Vaishali Dhariwal (vaishali@prsindia.org) challenges in implementation in scheduled areas and
issues related to rehabilitation. It observed that the
Parliament passes a Bill to replace MGNREGA consent of Gram Sabha is often obtained as a mere
formality. It recommended making it mandatory across
The Viksit Bharat—Guarantee for Rozgar and Ajeevika
all land acquisitions, not just in scheduled areas.
Mission (Gramin) (VB—G RAM G) Bill, 2025 was
Taking note of issues in rehabilitation, it recommended
passed by Parliament.16 The Bill replaces the Mahatma
that no possession of land should be allowed until the
Gandhi National Rural Employment Guarantee Act,
rehabilitation sites are fully functional and service
2005 (MGNREGA).17 Key features of the Bill include:
ready. The Committee emphasised aligning LARR Act
 Increased number of guaranteed days: Under with provisions of the Panchayats (Extension to
MGNREGA, members of a rural household Scheduled Areas) Act, 1996, and giving recognition to
seeking unskilled manual work were guaranteed at community forest resource titles under the Forest
least 100 days of wage employment in a financial Rights Act, 2006 for the compensation process.
year. The 2025 Bill increases the guarantee to 125
For a PRS summary of the report, see here.
days. Under MGNREGA, if a person seeking
work is not provided employment within 15 days,
the state government must pay them an
unemployment allowance. The 2025 law retains
Finance
this provision.
 Fund sharing pattern: The central government The Sabka Bima Sabki Raksha (Amendment of
covered the entire cost of wages, up to three-
Insurance Laws) Bill, 2025 passed by Parliament
fourths the material cost, and a share of the
administrative cost under MGNREGA. The state Shrusti Singh (shrusti@prsindia.org)
governments provided one fourth of the material
cost, rest of the administrative cost, unemployment The Sabka Bima Sabki Raksha (Amendment of
allowance, and compensation for delay in wage Insurance Laws) Bill was passed by Parliament.18 The
payment. Under the 2025 Bill, the programme will Bill seeks to amend the Insurance Act, 1938, the Life
be implemented as a centrally sponsored scheme, Insurance Corporation Act, 1956, and the Insurance
where the central and state governments will bear Regulatory and Development Authority Act, 1999.
all costs in a 60:40 ratios for all states and in a Key changes include:
90:10 ratios for north-eastern and himalayan states.
 100% FDI permitted in an Indian Insurance
The central government will determine state-wise
Company: The Bill increases the Foreign Direct
normative allocation for each financial year. The
Investment (FDI) limit in Indian Insurance
state governments will bear any excess expenditure
companies from 74% to 100% of the paid-up
incurred beyond this allocation.
equity capital.
- 5 -
Monthly Policy Review – December 2025 PRS Legislative Research
 Net-owned fund requirements for foreign be specified by regulations, including interests of
reinsurers lowered: The Bill reduces the net- any family member. It also adds that the central
owned fund requirements for foreign entities government may remove a member who has
engaged in the re-insurance business from Rs acquired any financial or other interests that is
5,000 crore to Rs 1,000 crore. likely to prejudice his functions.
 Minimum paid-up share capital for insurance  Requirement to register: The Bill retains
co-operative societies: The Bill amends the registration requirement for various entities.
definition of an insurance co-operative society to Intermediaries such as stock brokers, asset
remove the requirement of minimum paid-up share management companies, and investment advisors
capital of Rs 100 crore for life, general, and health must register with SEBI for carrying on investment
insurance businesses. activity or business. It also mandates registration
of Market Infrastructure Institutions (MIIs) with
 Powers of IRDAI: The Bill adds certain powers
SEBI which include stock exchanges, depositories,
to IRDAI. It empowers IRDAI to approve the
and clearing corporations. The Bill empowers
scheme of arrangement between an insurer and a
SEBI to require registration of specified classes of
company not engaged in insurance business. It
investors. It empowers SEBI to delegate its
also empowers IRDAI to supersede the Board of
powers of registration of intermediaries or
Directors of an insurer where it appoints an
investors to MIIs. MIIs may also make bye-laws
Administrator. This may be done if the insurer is
to minimise market abuse and foster transparency.
carrying on business prejudicial to the interests of
its policyholders. IRDAI may specify regulations  Grievance redressal and Ombudsperson: The
on remuneration, commission, or reward payable Bill empowers SEBI to establish an investor
to insurance agents or intermediaries, including grievance redressal mechanism and direct service
limits, manner of payments, and related providers to also constitute grievance redressal
disclosures. The Bill extends the powers of IRDAI mechanisms. It also empowers SEBI to appoint an
to inspect and investigate insurance intermediaries. Ombudsperson to redress grievances.
For a PRS summary of the Bill, see here. For a PRS summary of the Bill, see here.
The Securities Markets Code, 2025 introduced Parliament passes a Bill to levy a cess on
in Lok Sabha production of pan masala
Shrusti Singh (shrusti@prsindia.org) Ayush Stephen Toppo (ayush@prsindia.org)
The Securities Markets Code, 2025 was introduced in The Health Security se National Security Cess Bill,
Lok Sabha.19 It seeks to repeal and replace: (i) the 2025 was passed by Parliament.20 The Bill levies a
Securities Contracts (Regulations) Act, 1956, (ii) the cess on production of pan masala and any other goods
Securities and Exchange Board of India (SEBI) Act, notified by the central government. The cess will be
1992, and (iii) the Depositories Act, 1996. The Bill used for expenditure towards public health and national
seeks to consolidate the provisions of these Acts into a security. It will be calculated per machine installed for
single Code. It retains most of the provisions. The Bill production or per unit of wholly manual production.
has been referred to the Standing Committee on
For a PRS summary of the Bill, see here.
Finance (Chair: Mr. Bhartruhari Mahtab). Key changes
under the Bill include:
Parliament passes a Bill to increase central
 Composition of SEBI: Currently, SEBI consists excise duty on production of tobacco
of nine members: (i) the Chairperson, (ii) two
officials from the Ministry of Finance and Ayush Stephen Toppo (ayush@prsindia.org)
Corporate Affairs, (iii) one official of RBI, and (iv)
The Central Excise (Amendment) Bill, 2025 was
five other members appointed by the central
passed by Parliament.21 The Bill amends the Central
government of whom at least three must be whole-
Excise Act, 1944. The Bill increases central excise
time members. The Bill increases the number of
duty on unmanufactured tobacco, manufactured
other members appointed by the central
tobacco, tobacco products, and tobacco substitutes.
government to 11, of whom at least five must be
whole-time members. For a PRS summary of the Bill, see here.
 Conflict of interest of a Board Member: Under
the SEBI Act, a member of SEBI, who is a director The Manipur Goods and Services Tax (Second
of a company, must disclose any direct or indirect Amendment) Bill, 2025 passed by Parliament
pecuniary interest in a matter. He must not take
Shania Ali (shania@prsindia.org)
part in deliberations or decisions on such matters.
The Bill expands this restriction to include all
The Manipur Goods and Services Tax (Second
members with any direct or indirect interest as may
Amendment) Bill, 2025 was passed by the
- 6 -
Monthly Policy Review – December 2025 PRS Legislative Research
Parliament.22 The Bill sought to replace the Manipur over resolution for additional fee. It recommended
Goods and Services Tax (Second Amendment) that an RP shall be ineligible to be appointed as a
Ordinance, 2025 which was promulgated on October 7, liquidator to eliminate any conflict of interest.
2025. The Ordinance amended the Manipur Goods and Therefore, the Committee recommended
Services Tax Act, 2017. The Act provides for levy and appointing a liquidator upon the recommendation
collection of State GST (SGST) on intra-state supply of of the Insolvency and Bankruptcy Board of India
goods and services. The Ordinance aligned the (IBBI) to the NCLT.
Manipur Act with the amendments made to the Central
 Role of CoC in the liquidation process: The Bill
Goods and Services Tax Act, 2017 by the Finance Act,
empowers the CoC to supervise the conduct of the
2025. Key features include:
liquidation process. The Committee observed that
 Issuance of credit notes: A supplier may issue a this provision will ensure that CoC can leverage its
credit note to the recipient of goods or services if: commercial wisdom to assist the liquidator in
(i) the taxable value or tax charged in the invoice taking commercial decisions. However, it
exceeds the taxable value or tax charged, (ii) goods recommended that IBBI should clarify the scope of
or services have been returned, or (iii) goods or supervision to prevent any conflict with the
services have been found to be deficient. The statutory duties of the liquidator.
supplier’s tax liability for sales can accordingly be
 Voting threshold to initiate a Pre-Packaged
adjusted, provided the recipient has not availed of
Insolvency Resolution Process (PPIRP): Under
input tax credit attributable to that credit note.
the Bill, the voting threshold for unrelated
Input tax credit refers to the credit received for tax
financial creditors to initiate a PPIRP is 66%. The
paid on purchases (inputs), which can be used to
Committee recommended reducing this threshold
reduce GST payable on sales.
to 51% to expedite the PPIRP. This voting
 Exemption to certain supply of goods housed in threshold will also apply under the Creditor-
Special Economic Zones: Schedule III of the Act Initiated Insolvency Resolution Process.
specifies a list of transactions that are not
For a PRS Summary of the report, see here.
considered as supply of goods and services.
Hence, these are exempt from levy of SGST. The
Standing Committee submits report on review
Bill expands the list by adding supply of goods
of working of IBC and emerging issues
warehoused in a Special Economic Zone (SEZs) or
Free Trade Warehousing Zone (FTWZ) to any
Shrusti Singh (shrusti@prsindia.org)
person before clearance for exports or to the
Domestic Tariff Area (DTA). SEZs are special The Standing Committee on Finance (Chair: Mr.
areas set up by the government where businesses Bhartruhari Mahtab) submitted its report on ‘Review
get concessions to attract investment and increase of Working of Insolvency and Bankruptcy Code
exports. FTWZ is a special type of SEZ focused (IBC) and Emerging Issues’. Key recommendations
on warehousing and logistics. All parts of India of the Committee include: (i) establishing an online
outside SEZs are referred to as DTA. mechanism to issue “no dues” certificates and
statutory clearances for debtors, (ii) raising the
For a PRS summary of the Bill, see here.
penalty for frivolous applications, (iii) expansion of
competitive bidding for assets of firms entering the
Select Committee submits report on the
resolution process through global outreach, (iv)
Insolvency and Bankruptcy Code
introducing an early-stage mediation process as an
(Amendment) Bill, 2025
alternative dispute resolution mechanism outside a
Shrusti Singh (shrusti@prsindia.org) formal court process, and (v) ease the eligibility
criteria for homebuyers to initiate an insolvency
The IBC (Amendment) Bill, 2025 was introduced in process.
Lok Sabha in August 2025. It seeks to amend the
For a PRS summary of the report, see here.
Insolvency and Bankruptcy Code, 2016. The Bill was
referred to a Select Committee of Lok Sabha (Chair:
Mr. Baijayant Panda). The Committee presented its
report on December 17, 2025. Key observations and
Education
recommendations of the Committee include:
 Appointment of Liquidator: The Code provides The Viksit Bharat Shiksha Adhishthan Bill,
for the appointment of a Resolution Professional
2025 introduced in Lok Sabha
(RP) as a liquidator by the National Company Law
Tribunal (NCLT). The Bill amends this to allow Jahanvi Choudhary (jahanvi@prsindia.org)
the Committee of Creditors (CoC) to appoint an
RP or any other insolvency professional as a The Viksit Bharat Shiksha Adhishthan (VBSA) Bill,
liquidator. The Committee observed that the RP 2025 was introduced in Lok Sabha.23 It seeks to
may have a perverse incentive to favour liquidation establish a regulatory body for higher education. It
- 7 -
Monthly Policy Review – December 2025 PRS Legislative Research
replaces three existing bodies: (i) the University Grants Standing Committee submits report on
Commission (UGC), (ii) the All-India Council for schemes for education loans
Technical Education, and (iii) the National Council for
Navya Sriram (navya@prsindia.org)
Teacher Education. The Bill has been referred to a
Joint Parliamentary Committee. Key features of the
The Standing Committee on Education, Women,
Bill include:
Children, Youth and Sports (Chair: Mr. Digvijaya
 Establishment of VBSA and Councils: The Bill Singh) submitted its report on the “Review of Schemes
establishes the VBSA as the apex regulatory body for Education Loan and Financial Accessibility in
for higher education. It also establishes three Higher Education”.25 Key observations and
separate Councils for regulation, accreditation, and recommendations of the Committee include: (i)
standard setting. Currently, UGC also allocates addressing high rates of interest, (ii) revising limits for
grants to higher education institutions (HEIs). collateral-free loans to increase accessibility, (iii)
Under the Bill, neither the VBSA, nor its Councils exemption from providing CIBIL score to families
will have any powers regarding funding to HEIs. availing free rations, (iv) increasing moratorium period
for repayment from one year to two years, and (v)
 Appointment of members: The Chairperson and
expanding coverage of institutions under the PM
members of VBSA will be appointed by the
Vidyalakshmi Scheme.25 The PM Vidyalakshmi
President of India, on the recommendation of the
scheme provides collateral-free education loans with
central government. The Presidents and full-time
3% subsidy on interest, for students from families with
members of the Councils will also be appointed by
annual income up to eight lakh rupees.26 Currently,
the President of India, on the recommendation of a
this scheme is available only to students enrolled in
search committee.
specified quality higher education institutions.
 Penalties on HEIs: Penalties ranging between Rs
For a PRS summary of the report, see here.
10 lakh and Rs 70 lakh may be imposed on HEIs
for contravention of the Act. The Regulatory
Council may also recommend actions such as: (i)
withholding grants, (ii) reviewing autonomy, (iii)
External Affairs
revoking affiliation, or (iv) winding up.
For PRS summary of the Bill, see here.
Russian President visits India for bilateral talks
Standing Committee submits report on Navya Sriram (navya@prsindia.org)
autonomous bodies in higher education
The President of the Russian Federation, Mr. Vladimir
Jahanvi Choudhary (jahanvi@prsindia.org) Putin, visited India for bilateral talks.27,28 The two
countries re-affirmed their support for strengthening the
The Standing Committee on Education, Women,
strategic partnership. They agreed to expand
Children, Youth, and Sports (Chair: Mr. Digvijaya
cooperation in areas such as nuclear energy, space,
Singh) submitted its report on ‘Review of Autonomous
military, science and technology, and maritime
Bodies and Institutions- NTA, NAAC, Draft UGC
transport. Key agreements signed include: (i) an MoU
regulations, ICHR, ICPR, ICSSR, IIAS (Shimla) and
to develop a joint venture in urea manufacturing by
Auroville Foundation under the Department of Higher
Indian companies in Russia, (ii) two agreements to
Education’.24 The Committee highlighted issues in
establish a framework for migration of skilled workers
administration of competitive exams such as exam
from India to Russia, and (iii) a protocol to optimise
postponement, paper leaks, delayed results, and errors
customs control procedures. Other agreements relate to
in papers. It also noted that universities require support
cooperation in food safety, cooperation in maritime
in infrastructure, recruitment, and curriculum drafting
domain, broadcasting, healthcare, and academic
to implement the National Education Policy, 2020. collaboration.28 Russia also adopted a framework
Key recommendations of the Committee include: (i) agreement to join the International Big Cat Alliance
creating a nationwide blacklist of firms that should not (IBCA). IBCA is an India-led global coalition
be engaged for exam administration, (ii) filling launched in 2023 to conserve the world's seven big cat
vacancies in leadership positions, and avoiding species. This includes tiger, lion, leopard, snow
assigning these positions to officials as additional leopard, cheetah, jaguar, and puma.29
charge for long-term, (iii) re-evaluating reservation for
the economically weaker section for posts of Professor India and Oman sign Comprehensive
and Associate Professor, (iv) adopting a binary model Economic Partnership Agreement
for accreditation of higher education institutions
Vedika Bhanote (vedika@prsindia.org)
(accredited or not accredited), instead of a grade-based
model, and (v) setting up a high-level committee to
India and Oman signed a Comprehensive Economic
examine the proliferation of coaching centres.
Partnership Agreement to strengthen trade and
For PRS summary of the report, see here. investment ties.30 Oman will offer zero-duty access on
- 8 -
Monthly Policy Review – December 2025 PRS Legislative Research
over 98% of its tariff lines, covering most Indian  Occupational safety, health, and working
exports. India will cut tariffs on about 78% of its tariff conditions: Weekly working hours in any
lines, covering nearly 95% of imports from Oman by establishment must not exceed 48 hours. Period of
value. The agreement also permits 100% foreign direct each workday with intervals and spread overs will be
investment by Indian companies across major services notified by the central government. Women may be
sectors in Oman. employed for all types of work during evening and
night hours subject to specified conditions such as:
India and New Zealand conclude Free Trade (i) written consent of the employee, (ii) adequate
Agreement transportation facilities for pickup and drop, and (iii)
provision of CCTV surveillance. Every employer of
Vedika Bhanote (vedika@prsindia.org) a factory, dock, mine, building, and other
construction work must arrange for an annual free
India and New Zealand announced conclusion of Free
health check-up for its employees. The draft Rules
Trade Agreement (FTA).31 The agreement provides for
also specify manner of: (i) registration, (ii)
elimination or reduction of tariffs on about 95% of
maintenance of records, and (iii) constitution of
New Zealand’s exports to India, with over half of the
required bodies such as safety committees.
product lines becoming duty-free from the date of entry
into force. India will receive duty-free access for all its  Social security: The draft Rules specify
exports to New Zealand. In addition, New Zealand has procedures for providing benefits such as
committed to invest USD 20 billion in India over the insurance, provident fund, gratuity, and maternity
next 15 years. The FTA also creates a new visa benefits. They also specify manner of constituting
pathway for Indian professionals to allow up to 5,000 various bodies to administer social security
visas to be issued at any given time, with a maximum schemes. Gig workers are also eligible for social
stay of three years. security benefits if they have engaged for at least
90 days with one aggregator, or at least 120 days in
case of multiple aggregators, in the last financial
Standing Committee submits report on the
year. The central government may specify
Future of India-Bangladesh Relations
additional eligibility conditions for benefits to gig
Navya Sriram (navya@prsindia.org) workers.
 Industrial relations: The draft Rules specify the
The Standing Committee on External Affairs (Chair:
manner of recognition of trade unions, constitution
Dr Shashi Tharoor) published its report on the ‘Future
of bodies such as works committee, and notice of
of India-Bangladesh Relations’.32 Key observations
lock out or strike. Application must be made to the
and recommendations of the Committee include: (i)
central government at least 15 days before layoff,
expediting residual boundary demarcation under the
60 days before retrenchment, and 90 days before
Land Boundary Agreement, 2015, (ii) expediting
closure. They also specify model standing orders
fencing of 689 km of the unfenced land border, (iii)
for sectors such as mining, manufacturing, and
establishing a dedicated bilateral mechanism to monitor
services.
the progress of pending immigration cases, and (iv)
commencing discussions on the Ganga Water Treaty  Wages: These draft Rules provide for the
(set to expire in 2026) and convening regular meetings following: (i) manner of calculating minimum
of the Joint Rivers Commission. wage accounting for minimum calorie intake, fuel
and electricity, house rent, and educational and
For a PRS summary of the report, see here.
medical requirements for a family of three
individuals, (ii) revision of dearness allowance
twice a year, (iii) number of work hours in a
normal working day to be specified through a
Labour and Employment
general or special order, and (iv) fixing of the floor
wage by the central government in consultation
Comments invited on draft Rules under the
with the Central Advisory Board.
four Labour Codes
Comments are invited until January 29, 2026 for the
Shrusti Singh (shrusti@prsindia.org) draft Rules under Industrial Relations Code, 2020, and
until February 13, 2026 for other three draft Rules.
The Ministry of Labour and Employment invited
comments on the draft central Rules under the CAG releases audit report on the PM Kaushal
following codes: (i) Occupational Safety, Health, and
Vikas Yojana
Working Conditions Code, 2020, (ii) Code on Social
Security, 2020, (iii) Industrial Relations Code, 2020, Jahanvi Chaudhary (jahanvi@prsindia.org)
and (iv) Code on Wages, 2019.33, 34,35,36 These four
codes replace the 29 labour laws. Key features of the The Comptroller and Auditor General of India (CAG)
draft Rules include: released its audit report on “Skill Development under
Pradhan Mantri Kaushal Vikas Yojana (PMKVY)’.37
- 9 -
Monthly Policy Review – December 2025 PRS Legislative Research
The scheme was introduced in 2015 to provide this may lead to compliance burdens and delays as
industry-relevant skill training and certification to generally lifespan of these mines exceeds 30 years.
youths. The audit report covers the three phases of the It has proposed to extend the period of future
scheme launched between 2015 and 2022. These leases to 50 years.
phases had a combined target of providing skill training
 Relaxing end-use restriction: The MMDR Act
and certifications to around 1.32 crore candidates.
permits captive coal and lignite lessees to sell up to
The CAG highlighted that 41% of the candidates 50% of annual production in the open market after
certified under the short-term training and special meeting end-use requirements and paying an
project components of the scheme were placed (23 lakh additional levy. The Ministry noted that unutilised
out of 56 lakh candidates). It highlighted that selection production in these mines has led to legacy stock
of job roles without analysis of micro-level skill-gap accumulation. It has proposed to remove 50%
and market demands were primary reasons for low ceiling and allow sale of legacy mineral stocks.
placement. It highlighted that state and district plans
 Inclusion of coal gasification in mining
for skill development were not prepared in all states.
operation: Coal gasification converts coal into
The national plan was also not prepared. It also
synthetic gas which can be used as a cleaner
observed that even after completion of three phases of
energy source compared to coal. It has been
PMKVY, convergence between efforts of the central
proposed to add gasification to the definition of
and state governments was not effective.
mining to integrate the process within the legal and
It also highlighted several gaps in implementation and regulatory framework of mineral development.
monitoring. These include unreliable documents in
Comments are invited until January 11, 2026.
support of training and monitoring and delays in
assessment of post-completion of training. Around
New window introduced for auction of coal
20% of the funds allocated to states remained unspent
linkages in non-regulated sector
as of March 2024.
Key recommendations of CAG include: (i) aligning The Ministry of Coal has amended the Non-Regulated
trainings with skill gaps identified in job roles and Sector (NRS) Linkage Auction Policy, 2016 to
demand, (ii) preparing a long-term strategic plan to introduce a new auction window, CoalSETU (Coal for
provide overall direction and continuity, and (iii) Seamless, Efficient and Transparent Utilisation).40 The
preparing a roadmap for convergence and data NRS Linkage Policy provides for auction-based
integration for skilling initiatives across the central and allocation of coal linkages to non-regulated industries
state governments. such as cement, steel, sponge iron, and aluminium.
The new window allows auction of coal linkages
For PRS summary of the report, see here. without any specified end-use condition. Traders are
excluded from participation. Auctions for existing
specified end-use sub-sectors under the NRS policy
will continue alongside the new window. Linkages
Mining
under this window may be granted for up to 15 years,
and flexible use across group companies will be
Vaishali Dhariwal (vaishali@prsindia.org)
permitted. Coking coal will not be offered under this
window. Coal India Limited and Singareni Collieries
Comments invited on draft amendments to the
Company Limited will be the implementing agencies.
MMDR Act, 1957
The Ministry of Coal invited comments on draft Comments invited on the draft Coal Exchange
amendments to the Mines and Minerals (Development Rules, 2025
and Regulation) Act, 1957 (MMDR Act).38 The Act
The Ministry of Coal has invited comments on the
governs the regulation, development and conservation
Draft Coal Exchange Rules, 2025.41 The draft Rules
of minerals in India and the grant of mining rights.39
have been framed under the Mines and Minerals
Key changes proposed include:
(Development and Regulation) Act, 1957. A coal
 Maximum area under licences: The MMDR Act exchange is a regulated e-marketplace where coal can
specifies the maximum area that can be acquired be traded as a commodity.
under mining and prospecting licences. The
 Regulatory authority: Coal Controller
Ministry observed that the current area ceilings
Organisation has been designated as the authority
restrict development of modern mining projects. It
to register, regulate, and oversee coal exchanges.
has invited suggestions for the extension of the
It will have powers to: (i) grant, renew, and
area limits in light of the modern mining needs.
suspend registrations, (ii) approve contracts
 Period of mining lease: The MMDR Act limits through which coal is brought and sold, (iii) carry
coal and lignite mining leases to a maximum out market oversight, and (iv) conduct inspections.
period of 30 years. Renewal can be granted for a
maximum of 20 years. The Ministry observed that
- 10 -
Monthly Policy Review – December 2025 PRS Legislative Research
 Eligibility: An applicant for setting up a coal minerals such as magnesite, manganese, and rock
exchange must be a demutualised company phosphate, with domestic demand for them expected to
(ownership and management is separate from rise. It is also dependent on imports for critical
trading rights), with a minimum net worth of Rs minerals such as lithium, cobalt, and nickel. Key
100 crore. The draft Rules also specify recommendations of the Committee include: (i)
shareholding pattern for equity holders in a coal developing domestic processing and refining capacities
exchange. No member of a coal exchange can and making them cost-competitive, (ii) seeing up inter-
hold more than 5% of the share capital, and ministerial group to monitor post-auction progress of
members together cannot own more than 49% of mineral and critical mineral projects to address delays,
the share capital. No non-member can hold more (iii) increasing public-private partnerships in the
than 25% of the share capital. mineral sector.
 Registration: Registration of a coal exchange will For a PRS summary of the report, see here.
be granted for 25 years, with provision for renewal
for a further period of up to 25 years. The
Authority may revoke registration for violations of
the rules, reduction in net worth below the Communications
prescribed threshold, market manipulation, insider
trading, or failure to comply with directions.
Comments invited on the draft amendments to
 Responsibilities of coal exchanges: Coal the Post Office Act, 2023
exchanges will facilitate contract-based trading of
Ayush Stephen Toppo (ayush@prsindia.org)
coal through an electronic trading platform. Price
discovery on the platform will be done through a
The Department of Posts released draft amendments to
double-sided closed bid auction mechanism. To
the Post Office Act, 2023 for public feedback.44 The
manage market risk, each coal exchange will
Act provides the legal framework for the Post Office,
develop and implement a risk management
an undertaking of the central government (also known
framework. It will also constitute a Risk
as India Post). The draft amendments propose a
Assessment and Management Committee which
framework for a digital addressing system called
will monitor adherence to the framework. The
DHRUVA. Key features include:
exchange will also establish a Settlement
Guarantee Fund to address settlement defaults.  Digital Addressing System: This system will
Coal exchanges will have to set up surveillance allow users to digitally depict and share their
systems to detect cartelisation, insider trading, and addresses in a standardised format. Generation,
market manipulation. use, access, and validation of address information
will require the user’s consent. The amendments
Comments are invited until January 18, 2026.
empower the central government to prescribe
standards for addressing on items, address
Standing Committee submits report on
identifiers, and usage of postcodes.
clearances for coal projects
 The central government will appoint a Network
The Standing Committee on Coal, Mines and Steel Administrator to establish and operate a common
(Chair: Mr. Anurag Thakur) submitted report on system and set technical and governance standards.
‘Expediting and Simplifying the Environment and The Administrator will register one or more
Forest Clearance Process for Coal Mining Projects’.42 entities as Address Service Providers (ASPs).
Key observations and recommendations of the ASPs will provide services to end-users to generate
Committee include: (i) reducing the difference in address identifiers. The central government will
average time taken in granting environment and forest authorise specified persons to operate as
clearances between public and private sectors, (ii) Authorised Address Validation Agencies. These
bringing permissions given by mine safety and water agencies can validate address information linked to
authorities under the single window framework, (iii) an address identifier provided by a user. These
creating land banks for compensatory afforestation, and include departments of central or state
(iv) policy simplification and standardisation of governments, statutory bodies, companies
practices for promoting underground mining. incorporated, and any other notified persons.
For a PRS summary of the report, see here.  Offences and Penalties: The draft amendments
penalise undertaking activities without
Standing Committee submits report on self- authorisation. These include generating address
reliance in minerals and metals identifiers or validating address information. The
offences will be punishable with a civil penalty up
The Standing Committee on Coal, Mines and Steel
to one crore rupees. Continuing contravention will
(Chair: Mr. Anurag Thakur) submitted report on ‘Self-
attract an additional penalty of Rs 10 lakh per day.
Reliance in Minerals and Metals’.43 The Committee
Failure to furnish information or submitting false
noted that India remains dependent on imports for
information will be punishable with a civil penalty
- 11 -
Monthly Policy Review – December 2025 PRS Legislative Research
up to Rs 10 lakh. Continuing contravention will use without permission amounts to infringement
attract an additional penalty up to Rs 25,000 per under the Act, unless exempted. However, there is
day. The central government will appoint no specific exemption for text and data mining or
adjudicating officers to decide penalties. It will AI training.
also appoint an appellate authority to hear appeals
 Review of existing regulatory models: Voluntary
against the decisions of the adjudicating officers.
licencing requires AI developers to individually
seek permission and negotiate licences with each
Standing Committee submits report on
copyright owner before using their works for
mechanism to curb fake news
training. However, the scale of online content and
Navya Sriram (navya@prsindia.org) the number of potential rights holders make this
costly and impractical. A blanket text-and-data
The Standing Committee on Communications and mining exemption allows AI developers to train on
Information Technology (Chair: Dr Nishikant Dubey) copyrighted works without obtaining permission,
submitted its report on the “Review of Mechanism to provided the content is lawfully accessible. While
Curb Fake News” on September 11, 2025.45 Key this reduces barriers, it leaves creators
observations and recommendations of the Committee uncompensated. Collective licencing uses a
include: (i) defining “fake news” under the existing collective organisation to authorise licence works
regulatory mechanisms for all forms of media, (ii) at lower transaction costs and administer royalties
constituting an independent body for adjudicating cross to rights holders. However, holding out against
platform fake news cases and recommending penalties, licencing forces companies to demand high
(iii) ensuring accountability of editors, publishers, and royalties, which then creates high entry barriers.
intermediaries, (iv) a self-regulation mechanism for all This model also struggles with multimodal datasets
broadcasters, and (v) a unified digital portal for by making collective licensing impractical at scale.
grievance redressal with respect to fake news.45
 Proposed framework: DPIIT proposed a hybrid
For a PRS summary of the report, see here. model, where AI systems can train on any lawfully
accessed copyrighted work, but they must pay for
it through a mandatory blanket licence. Creators
are guaranteed payment through a statutory
Law and Justice remuneration right and cannot withhold the use of
their work. A body designated by the central
Vedika Bhanote (vedika@prsindia.org) government will collect payments from AI
developers for such usage, and distribute them
Repealing and Amending Bill, 2025 passed by fairly to rights holders.
Parliament
Comments are invited by January 7, 2026.
The Repealing and Amending Bill, 2025 was passed by
Parliament.46 It repeals 71 laws that are obsolete or
redundant. It also amends four Acts. It amends the
General Clauses Act, 1897 and the Code of Civil Shipping
Procedure, 1908 to update terminologies for registered
Vaishali Dhariwal (vaishali@prsindia.org)
posts. The Indian Succession Act, 1925 has been
amended to remove the requirement to obtain
Guidelines notified for schemes to promote
validation of wills by Courts in certain cases. The Bill
amends the Disaster Management Act, 2005 to rectify a domestic shipbuilding
drafting error.
The Ministry of Ports, Shipping and Waterways
For a PRS summary of the Bill, see here. notified operational guidelines for two shipbuilding
initiatives: (i) the Shipbuilding Financial Assistance
Comments invited on working paper on Scheme and (ii) the Shipbuilding Development
Scheme.48,49,50 Key features of the guidelines include:
Generative AI and copyright
 Financial Assistance Scheme: The scheme will
The Department for Promotion of Industry and Internal
have a total corpus of Rs 24,736 crore. The
Trade (DPIIT) has invited comments on a working
government will provide financial assistance for
paper on generative AI and copyright.47 The paper
vessel construction ranging from 15% for small
assesses the adequacy of the existing regulatory
vessels to 25% for specialised vessels on value
framework to protect copyright holders in training AI
over Rs 100 crore. The scheme will apply to all
systems. Key observations include:
vessels whose construction involves at least 30%
 Review of current framework: The Copyright domestic content, including components and
Act, 1957 grants copyright owner exclusive rights labour of Indian origin. Certain vessels, including
over reproduction, storage, adaptation, wooden vessels and those manufactured for
communication, and issuance of copies. Any such defence, will not be covered under the scheme.
- 12 -
Monthly Policy Review – December 2025 PRS Legislative Research
 Recycling: The scheme also incentivises vessel implementing Zero Liquid Discharge technologies for
scrapping and recycling. For scrapping vessels, wastewater management, (iii) revising timelines for
ship owners can collect a credit note worth 40% of future water sharing agreements between states on the
the fair scrap value. The credit notes can be Yamuna river bank from 30 years to 10 years, (iv) a
redeemed while paying for vessels constructed at targeted sludge removal plan to rejuvenate Yamuna
Indian shipyards and registered under the scheme. river floodplains and (v) dedicated healthcare units for
These credit notes can be redeemed within three diarrhoea treatment and public health campaigns,
years and they can be transferred or sold. particularly in low income and high-risk areas.52
 Shipbuilding Development Scheme: The scheme For a PRS summary of the report, see here.
will have a total budgetary outlay of Rs 19,989
crore. It will provide incentive for development of
greenfield shipbuilding clusters and expansion of
brownfield shipyards. Greenfield clusters will Urban Development
receive 100% capital support through a 50:50
centre-state special purpose vehicle. Brownfield Vedika Bhanote (vedika@prsindia.org)
shipyards on the other hand will receive 25%
capital assistance for critical infrastructure Standing Committee submits report on review
expansion and installation of automation systems. of Mission AMRUT
To promote bankability of these projects, the
The Standing Committee on Housing and Urban
scheme also includes a credit risk coverage
Affairs (Chair: Mr. Magunta Sreenivasulu Reddy)
framework. Government-backed insurance will be
presented its report on ‘Review of Atal Mission for
offered to cover for pre-shipment, post-shipment,
Rejuvenation and Urban Transformation (AMRUT)
and vendor default risks.
with special emphasis on Urban Drinking Water’.53
AMRUT was launched in June 2015. It was subsumed
under AMRUT 2.0 in October 2021. AMRUT 2.0
focuses on improving urban water security,
Environment
strengthening urban governance, and building
institutional and technical capacities. Key observations
Standing Committee submits report on air and recommendations of the Committee include: (i)
pollution in Delhi-NCR pursuing enhanced central funding, especially for
underserved regions, (ii) strengthening inter-agency
Vaishali Dhariwal (vaishali@prsindia.org)
coordination, (iii) improving quality of data monitoring
(iv) formulating a National Urban Aquifer Recharge
The Standing Committee on Science and Technology,
Strategy, and (v) improving wastewater reuse.
Environment, Forests and Climate Change (Chair: Mr.
Bhubaneswar Kalita) on ‘Air Pollution in Delhi NCR For a PRS summary of the report, see here.
and steps taken by various agencies for its
mitigation’.51 Key observations and recommendations
of the Committee include: (i) upgrading all manual
monitoring stations and improving geographical Railways
coverage of monitoring stations, (ii) undertaking
pollution source apportionment studies at a regular Vaishali Dhariwal (vaishali@prsindia.org)
interval, (iii) containing vehicular and industrial
emissions, and pollution from dust and waste burning, Committee submits report on enhancing
and (iv) addressing shortage of crop residue freight related earning of Indian Railways
management machines during peak demand.
The Standing Committee on Railways (Chair: Dr. C.
For a PRS summary of the report, see here. M. Ramesh) presented its report on ‘Increasing Freight
Related Earnings of Indian Railways and Development
Standing Committee submits report on water of Dedicated Freight Corridors’. The Committee noted
pollution in Delhi NCR that Railways had last revised freight rates in
November 2018 and rates have remained unchanged
Navya Sriram (navya@prsindia.org) since then despite rising operational costs. It
recommended annual comprehensive assessment of
The Standing Committee on Science and Technology, freight rates, taking into account market demand and
Environment, Forests and Climate Change (Chair: Mr operational costs. It observed that freight revenue
Bhubaneswar Kalita) submitted its report on “Water accounts for about 65% of Railways’ earnings. To
Pollution in Delhi NCR and Steps Taken by Various enhance freight revenue, it recommended: (i)
Agencies for its Mitigation”.52 Key observations and diversifying commodity basket to include automobiles
recommendations of the Committee include: (i) and e-commerce goods, instead of keeping it limited to
improving existing contaminant monitoring and sewage minerals, (ii) building freight terminals for better
management systems in the Yamuna river, (ii) connectivity, and (iii) ensuring wagon availability and
- 13 -
Monthly Policy Review – December 2025 PRS Legislative Research
encouraging private wagon ownership. It also noted Information Technology
that Dedicated Freight Corridors offer higher transport
speed and recommended augmenting existing feeder Niranjana S Menon (niranjana@prsindia.org)
routes and developing new feeder routes to ensure
integration of industrial hubs. Standing Committee on Communications
submits report on the IT Agreement
For a PRS Summary of the report, see here.
The Standing Committee on Communications and
Information Technology (Chair: Dr. Nishikant Dubey)
presented its report on the ‘Impact of Information
Health Technology Agreement in the new age’. The
Committee highlighted challenges faced by India after
Jahanvi Choudhary (jahanvi@prsindia.org)
signing the IT Agreement. It observed that signing the
agreement exposed India’s underdeveloped electronics
Standing Committee submits report on rise in
industry to global competition prematurely. It
prices of medicines highlighted issues such as: (i) India’s dependence on
imports for electronics and IT products, (ii)
The Standing Committee on Chemical and Fertilisers
concentration of economic activities in assembly
(Chair: Mr. Azad Kirti Jha) submitted its report on
instead of manufacturing, and (iii) cyber security risks
‘Price Rise of Medicines in the Pharmaceutical Sector
caused by lowering trade barriers under the agreement.
Impacting the Lives of Ordinary Citizens Adversely - A
Review’.54 Key recommendations of the Committee Key recommendations by the Committee include: (i)
include: (i) amending the Drugs (Prices Control) Order constituting a High Level Empowered Inter-Ministerial
(DPCO), 2013 to allow for rationalising trade margin, Committee to examine the impact of the agreement on
(ii) regulating non-scheduled drugs and fixed dose the Indian IT industry, (ii) enforcing existing provisions
combinations, and (iii) strengthening regulation of of the Digital Personal Data Protection Act, 2023, and
online drug platforms. (iii) incentivising e-waste recycling. It also
recommended raising certain concerns at the World
For PRS summary of the report, see here.
Trade Organisation, such as: (i) the inclusion of 5G
equipment and AI components under the agreement,
(ii) clearer classification for hybrid digital products,
and (iii) mechanisms for technology transfer.
Agriculture
For a PRS summary of the report, please see here.
Shrusti Singh (shrusti@prsindia.org)
Standing Committee submits report on self-
sufficiency in production of fertilisers Annexure
The Standing Committee on Chemicals and Fertilisers
Parliament has re-constituted some of its
(Chair: Mr. Azad Kirti Jha) presented its report on
Departmentally Related Standing Committees. The
‘Self-sufficiency in production of fertilisers with a
subjects identified for examination for 2025-26 by
view to curb import of fertilisers – Review of
some of the Committees are given below. See the
constraints thereof’. Key recommendations include:
Monthly Policy Reviews of October 2025 and
(i) expansion of production capacity through fiscal
November 2025 for earlier announcements.
and tax incentives, (ii) development of indigenous
process technology for setting up fertiliser plants, (iii) Transport, Tourism and Culture
expediting natural gas extraction projects to reduce
1 Evaluation of Regional Connectivity (RCS-UDAN) and
import dependence, (iv) setting up of a task force for
Expansion of Last-Mile Links
upgradation, modernisation, and revival of aging urea
2 Framework for Emerging Aviation Technologies, Drone
plants, and (v) introducing a production-linked
economy, Modernization of Airspace Management, and
incentive scheme for drones used in spraying of nano
Addressing Critical Supply-Chain Challenges Facing the Indian
fertilisers.
Aviation Industry
For a PRS Summary of the report, see here. 3 India as a Global Hub for Aviation MRO and Aircraft
Manufacturing
4 Promotion of aero sports and adventure
5 Aeromedical infrastructure and health support systems for air
crew and personnel
6 Reforming National Museums and Strategy for Repatriation of
Antiquities.
7 Functioning of ASI and strengthening Heritage Site
Management
- 14 -
Monthly Policy Review – December 2025 PRS Legislative Research
8 Port Modernization, Shipbuilding Industry, and Inland 1 Effective Redressal of Grievances by Strengthening the Public
Waterways. Grievances Redressal System
9 Development and maintenance of National Highways 2 Implementation of the Citizen's Charter in the Central
Government
10 Review of Gati Shakti National Master Plan: Multi- Modal
Integration of Transport Networks 3 Redressal of Grievances related to Scheduled Castes and
Scheduled Tribe
11 A Comprehensive Review of Road Safety including Vision
Zero, Tyre ratings, Highway Design Standards, Enforcement Department of Legal Affairs
Strategies, and the World Bank-sponsored Safe Corridor
1 Review of functioning of Tribunal System in the Country
Demonstration Project
2 Creation and Development of Institutional Mechanism to
12 Evaluating the Need for an Integrated Transport Development
support the Alternative Dispute Resolution Ecosystem
Body and Installation of Integrated Transport Management
Systems (ITMS) in Every State Department of Justice
13 Holistic Development of India’s Tourism Sector through Formal 1 Appointments in Higher Judiciary
Skill Development, University-Level Courses and Professional
2 Review of Judicial Infrastructure
Training for Guides, Hospitality and Eco- Tourism
3 Judicial Processes and their reform:
14 Promotion of Blue Economy Tourism.
i Court proceedings and Judgements in regional languages; and
15 Integrating Tourism Infrastructure, Tariff Management, and
availability of Supreme Court and High Court Judgements in
Regional Transport Connectivity in National Tourist Spots for
scheduled languages
Sustainable Destination Development.
ii 24 x 7 Virtual Courts and Live streaming of Court Proceedings
Personnel, Public Grievances, Law and Justice
iii Code of Conduct for the Judges of Higher Judiciary
Department of Personnel and Training
iv Court Manager System for the Management of Courts
1 Filling up of vacancies in the Central Government
vi Assessment of Fast-Track Special Courts
2 Review of the Right to Information Act, 2005, and Working of
vi Taking up of post-retirement assignments by the Judges
the Central Information Commission
3 Effectiveness of Vigilance Administration
4 Functioning of the Central Administrative Tribunal
Department of Administrative Reforms and Public Grievances
1 Monetary Policy Statement, 2025-26, Resolution of the Monetary https://mopng.gov.in/files/Whatsnew/2025-12-19-163402-29rio-
Policy Committee, December 3 to 5, 2025, Reserve Bank of India, PNG-Rules,-2025.pdf.
December 5, 2025, 10 The Oilfields (Regulations and Development) Act, 1948,
https://www.rbi.org.in/Scripts/BS_PressReleaseDisplay.aspx?prid=6 https://www.indiacode.nic.in/bitstream/123456789/1397/3/A1948-
1749. 53.pdf.
2 Developments in India’s Balance of Payments during the Second 11 The Petroleum and Natural Gas Rules, 1959,
Quarter (July-September) of 2025-26, Reserve Bank of India, https://dghindia.gov.in/assets/downloads/l2.pdf.
December 1, 2025,
12 “Guidelines for Virtual Power Purchase Agreements”, Central
https://www.rbi.org.in/Scripts/BS_PressReleaseDisplay.aspx?prid=6
Electricity Regulatory Commission, December 24, 2025,
1714.
https://cercind.gov.in/regulations/Guidelines-VPPA.pdf.
3 “India's Index of industrial production records growth of 0.4% in
13 Report no. 10, Standing Committee on Energy: ‘Performance
October 2025”, Press Information Bureau, Ministry of Statistics and
Evaluation of Solar Power Projects in the Country’, Lok Sabha,
Programme Implementation, December 1, 2025,
December 8, 2025,
https://www.pib.gov.in/PressReleasePage.aspx?PRID=2196938&reg
https://sansad.in/getFile/lsscommittee/Energy/18_Energy_10.pdf?sou
=3&lang=1.
rce=loksabhadocs.
4 “India's Index of Industrial Production recorded growth of 5.2% in
14, Report No. 7, Estimates Committee: . Implementation of Pradhan
November 2024”, Press Information Bureau, Ministry of Statistics
Mantri Kisan Urjan Suraksha Evam Utthaan Madhabhiyan (PM-
and Programme Implementation, January 10, 2025,
KUSUM) and PM Surya Ghar: Muft Bijli Yojana, Lok Sabha,
https://www.pib.gov.in/PressReleasePage.aspx?PRID=2091785&reg
December 4, 2025,
=3&lang=1.
https://sansad.in/getFile/lsscommittee/Estimates/18_Estimates_7.pdf?
5 Report no. 27, Standing Committee on Finance: ‘Performance source=loksabhadocs.
Review of National Statistical Commission (NSC)’, Lok Sabha,
15 Report No. 17 of 2025, Performance Audit Report on Deen Dayal
December 2, 2025,
Upadhyaya Gram Jyoti Yojana/ Pradhan Mantri Sahaj Bijli Har Ghar
https://sansad.in/getFile/lsscommittee/Finance/18_Finance_27.pdf?so
Yojana, Union Government, Ministry of Power, December 18, 2025,
urce=loksabhadocs.
https://cag.gov.in/en/audit-report/details/123660.
6 The Sustainable Harnessing and Advancement of Nuclear Energy
16 The Viksit Bharat—Guarantee for Rozgar and Ajeevika Mission
for Transforming India Act, 2025,
(Gramin) Bill, 2025,
https://prsindia.org/files/bills_acts/bills_parliament/2025/The_SHAN
https://prsindia.org/files/bills_acts/bills_parliament/2025/Viksit_Bhar
TI_Act_2025.pdf.
at%E2%80%93Guarantee_for_Rozgar_and_Ajeevika_Mission_(Gra
7 The Atomic Energy Act, 1962, min)_VB%E2%80%93G_RAM_G_Bill,2025.pdf.
https://www.indiacode.nic.in/bitstream/123456789/1413/1/A1962-
17 The National Rural Employment Guarantee Act, 2005,
33.pdf.
https://www.indiacode.nic.in/bitstream/123456789/6930/1/the_mahat
8 The Civil Liability for Nuclear Damage Act, 2010, ma_gandhi_national_rural_employment_guarantee_act%2C_2005.pd
https://www.indiacode.nic.in/bitstream/123456789/2084/5/A2010- f.
38.pdf.
18 The Sabka Bima Sabki Raksha (Amendment of Insurance Laws)
9 G.S.R. 888(E), The Gazette of India, Ministry of Petroleum and Bill, 2025,
Natural Gas, December 9, 2025,
- 15 -
Monthly Policy Review – December 2025 PRS Legislative Research
December 30, 2025,
https://egazette.gov.in/WriteReadData/2025/268945.pdf.
https://prsindia.org/files/bills_acts/bills_parliament/2025/Sabka_Bim
a_Sabki_Raksha(Amendment_of_Insurance_Laws)Bill,2025.pdf. 35 G.S.R 936(E), Draft Code on Wages (Central) Rules, 2025, The
Gazette of India, Ministry of Labour and Employment, December 30,
19 The Securities Markets Code, 2025,
2025, https://egazette.gov.in/WriteReadData/2025/268946.pdf.
https://prsindia.org/files/bills_acts/bills_parliament/2025/Securities_
Markets_Code,2025.pdf. 36 G.S.R. 930(E), Draft Industrial Relations Code (Central) Rules,
2025, The Gazette of India, Ministry of Labour and Employment,
20 The Health Security se National Security Cess Act, 2025,
December 30, 2025,
https://prsindia.org/files/bills_acts/bills_parliament/2025/Health_Sec
https://egazette.gov.in/WriteReadData/2025/268942.pdf.
urity_se_National_Security_Cess_Act_2025.pdf.
37 Report no. 20 of 2025, Report on Skill Development under Pradhan
21 The Central Excise (Amendment) Act, 2025,
Mantri Kaushal Vikas Yojana, Ministry of Skill Development and
https://prsindia.org/files/bills_acts/bills_parliament/2025/Central_Exc
Entrepreneurship,
ise_(A)_Act_2025.pdf.
https://cag.gov.in/uploads/download_audit_report/2025/Report-No.-
22 The Manipur Goods and Services Tax (Second Amendment) Bill, 20-of-2025_PA-PMKVY_English-PDF-A-
2025, https://prsindia.org/billtrack/the-manipur-goods-and-services- 06943abec463479.68516873.pdf.
tax-second-amendment-bill-2025.
38 Proposal for amendment of the Mines and Minerals (Development
23 The Viksit Bharat Shiksha Adhishthan Bill, 2025 and Regulation) Act, 1957, Ministry of Coal, December 12, 2025,
https://prsindia.org/files/bills_acts/bills_parliament/2025/Viksit_Bhar https://coal.nic.in/sites/default/files/2025-12/12-12-2025ps1-wn.pdf.
at_Shiksha_Adhishthan_Bill,_2025.pdf.
39 Mines and Minerals (Development and Regulation) Act, 1957,
24 Review of Autonomous Bodies and Institutions- NTA, NAAC, https://www.indiacode.nic.in/bitstream/123456789/13122/1/67_of_1
Draft UGC regulations, ICHR, ICPR, ICSSR, IIAS (Shimla) and 957.pdf.
Auroville Foundation under the Department of Higher Education,
40 “Auction of Coal Linkage for Seamless, Efficient & Transparent
Rajya Sabha, December 08, 2025,
Utilisation (CoalSETU) by creation of new window named
https://sansad.in/getFile/rsnew/Committee_site/Committee_File/Repo
"CoalSETU window" in the NonRegulated Sector (NRS) Linkage
rtFile/16/214/371_2025_12_12.pdf?source=rajyasabha.
Policy to utilise coal for any industrial use and export” Ministry of
25 Report No. 372, Standing Committee on Education, Women, Coal, December 19, 2025,
Children, Youth and Sports, ‘Review of Schemes for Education https://www.coal.nic.in/sites/default/files/2025-12/19-12-2025-
Loans and Financial Accessibility in Higher Education’, Rajya bwn.pdf.
Sabha, December 9, 2025,
41 Draft Coal Exchange Rules, 2025, Ministry of Coal, December 19,
https://sansad.in/rs/committees/16?departmentally-related-standing-
2025, https://www.coal.nic.in/sites/default/files/2025-12/19-12-2025-
committees.
a.pdf.
26 "Cabinet approves PM-Vidyalaxmi scheme to provide financial
42 Fifteenth Report of the Standing Committee on Coal, Mines and
support to meritorious students so that financial constraints do not
Steel on ‘Expediting and Simplifying the Environment and Forest
prevent any youth of India from pursuing quality higher education",
Clearance Process for Coal Mining Projects’ December 10, 2025,
Press Information Bureau, Union Cabinet, November 6, 2024,
https://sansad.in/getFile/lsscommittee/Coal,%20Mines%20and%20St
https://www.pib.gov.in/PressReleasePage.aspx?PRID=2071131&reg
eel/18_Coal_Mines_and_Steel_15.pdf?source=loksabhadocs.
=3&lang=2.
43 Sixteenth Report of the Standing Committee on Coal, Mines and
27“Joint Statement following the 23rd India - Russia Annual Summit
Steel on ‘Self-Reliance in Minerals and Metals’ December 17, 2025,
(December 05, 2025)”, Press Release, Ministry of External Affairs,
https://sansad.in/d81922cc-0009-4953-8ee7-07e947670c4b.
December 5, 2025, https://www.mea.gov.in/bilateral-
documents.htm?dtl/40410. 44 “Inviting Comments on the proposed draft of the amendments to
the Post Office Act, 2023”, Department of Posts, December 1,
28 “List of Outcomes: State Visit of the President of the Russian
2025,https://www.indiapost.gov.in/api/documents/file/U2FsdGVkX1
Federation to India (December 04 – 05, 2025)”, Press Release,
8xSwvvi1EQ-B9oDLv_e_chixfQ0m-
Ministry of External Affairs, December 5, 2025,
E1M1FBJ6DxOfTUvhXbSuCvxAFepV5oIXiAv0uT2iUDh1Sfw.
https://www.mea.gov.in/bilateral-
documents.htm?dtl/40409/List_of_Outcomes_State_Visit_of_the_Pre 45 Report No. 22, Standing Committee on Communications and
sident_of_the_Russian_Federation_to_India_December_04__05_202 Information Technology, ‘Review of Mechanism to Curb Fake
5. News’, Lok Sabha, December 2, 2025,
https://sansad.in/getFile/lsscommittee/Communications%20and%20I
29 “Cabinet approves establishment of International Big Cat Alliance
nformation%20Technology/18_Communications_and_Information_
(IBCA)", Press Information Bureau, Union Cabinet, February 29,
Technology_22.pdf?source=loksabhadocs.
2024,
https://www.pib.gov.in/PressReleasePavidyage.aspx?PRID=2010122 46 The Repealing and Amending Act, 2025,
&reg=3&lang=2. https://prsindia.org/files/bills_acts/bills_parliament/2025/Repealing_
And_Amending_Bill,2025.pdf.
30“India and Oman sign Comprehensive Economic Partnership
Agreement (CEPA),” Press Information Bureau, Ministry of 47 “Working Paper on Generative AI and Copyright,” Department for
Commerce and Industry, December 18, 2025, Promotion of Industry and Internal Trade, Ministry of Commerce and
https://www.pib.gov.in/PressReleasePage.aspx?PRID=2205889&reg Industry, December 8, 2025,
=3&lang=1. https://www.dpiit.gov.in/static/uploads/2025/12/ff266bbeed10c48e34
79c941484f3525.pdf.
31 “India and New Zealand Announce Conclusion of Landmark Free
Trade Agreement Negotiations,” Press Information Bureau, Ministry 48 Guidelines for Shipbuilding Development Scheme, Ministry of
of Commerce and Industry, December 18, 2025, Ports, Shipping and Waterways, December 26, 2025,
https://www.pib.gov.in/PressReleasePage.aspx?PRID=2207300&reg https://shipmin.gov.in/sites/default/files/Annexure%202%20Credit%
=3&lang=2. 20risk%20coverage%20guidelines_0.pdf.
32 Report No. 9, Standing Committee on External Affairs, ‘Future of 49 Guidelines for Shipbuilding Financial Assistance Scheme, Ministry
India-Bangladesh Relationship’, Lok Sabha, December 18, 2025, of Ports, Shipping and Waterways, December 26, 2025,
https://sansad.in/ls/committee/departmentally-related-standing- https://shipmin.gov.in/sites/default/files/Annexure%201%20SBFAS
committees/11-External%20Affairs- %20guidelines_0.pdf.
nameH=%E0%A4%B5%E0%A4%BF%E0%A4%A6%E0%A5%87 50 Govt notifies guidelines for shipbuilding assistance, development
%E0%A4%B6%E0%A5%80%20%E0%A4%AE%E0%A4%BE%E0 schemes, Press Information Bureau, December 27, 2025,
%A4%AE%E0%A4%B2%E0%A5%87. https://www.pib.gov.in/PressReleasePage.aspx?PRID=2209139&reg
33 G.S.R. 934(E), Draft Occupational Safety, Health and Working =3&lang=1.
Conditions Code (Central) Rules, 2025, The Gazette of India, 51 Four Hundred First Report of the Department-related
Ministry of Labour and Employment, December 30, 2025, Parliamentary Standing Committee on Science and Technology,
https://egazette.gov.in/WriteReadData/2025/268944.pdf. Environment, Forests and Climate Change on Air Pollution in Delhi
34 G.S.R. 935(E), Draft Social Security Code (Central) Rules, 2025,
The Gazette of India, Ministry of Labour and Employment,
- 16 -
Monthly Policy Review – December 2025 PRS Legislative Research
0Affairs/18_Housing_and_Urban_Affairs_7.pdf?source=loksabhadoc
s.
NCR and steps taken by various agencies for its mitigation,
December 12, 2025, 54 Price Rise of Medicines in the Pharmaceutical Sector- A Review,
https://sansad.in/getFile/rsnew/Committee_site/Committee_File/Repo Lok Sabha, December 01, 2025,
rtFile/19/217/401_2025_12_16.pdf?source=rajyasabha. https://sansad.in/getFile/lsscommittee/Chemicals%20&%20Fertilizer
s/18_Chemicals_And_Fertilizers_14.pdf?source=loksabhadocs.
52 Report No. 402, Standing Committee on Science and Technology,
Environment, Forest and Climate Change, ‘Water Pollution in Delhi DISCLAIMER: This document is being furnished to you for your
NCR and steps taken by various agencies for its mitigation’, Rajya information. You may choose to reproduce or redistribute this report
Sabha, December 12, 2025, for non-commercial purposes in part or in full to any other person
https://sansad.in/rs/committees/19?departmentally-related-standing- with due acknowledgement of PRS Legislative Research (“PRS”).
committees. The opinions expressed herein are entirely those of the author(s).
53 Report no. 7, Standing Committee on Housing and Urban Affairs: PRS makes every effort to use reliable and comprehensive
information, but PRS does not represent that the contents of the
‘Review of Atal Mission for Rejuvenation and Urban Transformation
report are accurate or complete. PRS is an independent, not-for-
(AMRUT) with special emphasis on Urban Drinking Water’, Lok
profit group. This document has been prepared without regard to the
Sabha, December 12, 2025,
objectives or opinions of those who may receive it.
https://sansad.in/getFile/lsscommittee/Housing%20and%20Urban%2
- 17 -
