Monthly Policy Review
August 2023
Highlights of this Issue
Monsoon session 2023 concludes (p. 2)
The monsoon session of Parliament concluded on August 11, 2023. 25 Bills were introduced and 23 were
passed. This session saw the first no confidence motion of the 17th Lok Sabha, which was negatived.
GDP grows 7.8% in first quarter of 2023-24 (p.2)
Growth in all sectors was positive in the first quarter of 2023-24 with financial, real estate and professional
services registering the highest growth.
Bills to replace the Indian Penal Code, CrPC, and Evidence Act introduced (p. 4)
Three Bills replacing the Indian Penal Code, 1860, the Code of Criminal Procedure (CrPC), 1973 and the Indian
Evidence Act, 1872 were introduced and referred to the Standing Committee on Home Affairs.
Bill to amend the appointment of Chief Election Commissioner introduced (p. 6)
The President will appoint the CEC on the recommendation of a Selection Committee, which includes the Prime
Minister, Leader of the Opposition in Lok Sabha, and a Cabinet Minister nominated by the Prime Minister.
Parliament passed the NCT of Delhi (Amendment) Bill, 2023 (p. 3)
The Bill establishes an Authority to recommended transfers and postings of officers in the Delhi government to
the LG. The Authority will consist of the Delhi Chief Minister, Chief Secretary, and Principal Home Secretary.
The Digital Personal Data Protection Bill, 2023 passed by Parliament (p.5)
The Bill provides for the data protection and privacy for individuals. It lays out rights and duties of data
principals and the obligations of data fiduciaries.
Parliament passes the Registration of Births and Deaths (Amendment) Bill, 2023 (p. 3)
The Bill establishes a national database of registered births and deaths, which can be shared with approved
authorities. The Bill requires the Aadhaar details of parents and informants in cases of births.
Cabinet approves PM e-Bus Sewa for enhancement of city bus operations (p. 19)
The scheme aims to enhance city bus operations in cities with a population over three lakh people. The scheme
has a budget outlay of Rs 57,613 crore over 10 years.
Central Sector Scheme for artisan and craftspeople approved by Cabinet (p.18)
The scheme will provide credit support to artisan and craftspeople at a concessional interest rate of 5%. It will
also provide for skill upgradation and marketing support
New National Curriculum Framework for School Education released (p.10)
The framework revises requirements on language education, relaxes norms on examinations, and provides
greater choice of subjects in secondary education.
Standing Committees submit reports on various subjects and policies
This includes reports on electoral reforms, judicial reforms, citizens’ data security, mental health, and ecosystem
of startups.
CAG submits its audit report on Ayushman Bharat-PMJAY (p.11)
The audit flags issues such as irregularities in the inclusion of beneficiaries, errors in datasets and shortcomings
in empanelled hospitals.
September 1, 2023
PRS Legislative Research ◼ Institute for Policy Research Studies
3rd Floor, Gandharva Mahavidyalaya ◼ 212, Deen Dayal Upadhyaya Marg ◼ New Delhi – 110002
Tel: (011) 23234801, 43434035 ◼ www.prsindia.org
Monthly Policy Review – August 2023 PRS Legislative Research
Parliament Figure 1: GDP growth at constant 2011-12 prices (in
percentage, year-on-year)
Arpita Mallick (arpita@prsindia.org)
25% 21.6%
20%
Monsoon Session 2023 concludes; 23 Bills 15% 9.1% 13.1% 7.8%
passed; three referred to Standing Committees 10% 5.2% 4.0% 6.2% 4.5% 6.1%
5%
The Monsoon Session of Parliament was held from 0%
July 20, 2023 to August 11, 2023, with 17 sittings. Q1 Q2 Q3 Q4 Q1 Q2 Q3 Q4 Q1
During this time, 25 Bills were introduced and 23 were
2021-22 2022-23 2023-
passed. Three Bills replacing the Indian Penal Code,
24
1860, the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973 and the
Indian Evidence Act, 1872 were introduced and Note: In first quarter of 2021-22, GDP had increased on a low base
after contracting by 23.4% in first quarter of 2020-21.
referred to the Standing Committee on Home Affairs.
Sources: Ministry of Statistics and Programme Implementation; PRS.
Bills introduced and passed in this session include the GDP across economic sectors is measured in terms of
Government of NCT of Delhi (Amendment) Bill, 2023, Gross Value Added (GVA). Growth in all sectors was
the Digital Personal Data Protection Bill, 2023, the positive in the first quarter of 2023-24. Financial, real
Mines and Minerals (Development and Regulation) estate and professional services registered the highest
Bill, 2023 and the Registration of Births and Deaths growth (12.2%), followed by trade (9.2%), construction
(Amendment) Bill, 2023. Bills pending from earlier (7.9%), and public services (7.9%).
sessions that were passed include the Coastal
Table 1: Growth in GVA across sectors in Q1 of
Aquaculture Authority (Amendment) Bill, 2023, the
2023-24, (in %, year-on-year)
Forest (Conservation) Amendment Bill, 2023 and, the
Sector Quarter 1
Inter-Services Organisation Bill, 2023. This session
saw the first No-confidence motion of the 17th Lok 2021-22 2022-23 2023-24
Sabha. The motion was negatived through a voice Agriculture 3.4% 2.4% 3.5%
vote. On August 31, 2023, the Minister of
Mining 12.2% 9.5% 5.8%
Parliamentary Affairs announced that a five-day
Manufacturing 51.5% 6.1% 4.7%
session of Parliament will be held starting September
18, 2023.1 Electricity 16.3% 14.9% 2.9%
Construction 77.0% 16.0% 7.9%
For more details on legislative business transacted
during the Monsoon Session 2023, see here. For Trade 41.4% 25.7% 9.2%
details on the functioning of Parliament during the Financial services 2.8% 8.5% 12.2%
session, see here.
Public services 6.5% 21.3% 7.9%
GVA 20.2% 11.9% 7.8%
GDP 21.6% 13.1% 7.8%
Macroeconomic Development Note: GVA is measured at basic prices (2011-12).
Sources: Ministry of Statistics and Programme Implementation; PRS.
Tushar Chakrabarty (tushar@prsindia.org)
Industrial production grew by 4.5% in first
GDP grows at 7.8% in first quarter of 2023-24 quarter of 2023-24
Gross Domestic Product (GDP) (at constant prices) The Index of Industrial Production (IIP) grew by 4.5%
grew at 7.8% in the first quarter (April-June) of 2023- in the first quarter (April-June) of 2023-24.3 This was
24, over the corresponding period in 2022-23.2 In the lower than the 12.8% growth witnessed in the first
first quarter of 2022-23, GDP had grown by 13.1%. quarter of 2022-23. The weight of manufacturing,
In the fourth quarter (January-March) of 2022-23, mining, and electricity sectors in the IIP is 78%, 14%,
GDP had grown by 6.1%. and 8% respectively.
The mining sector grew by 6.4% in the first quarter of
2023-24 as compared to 9.1% in the corresponding
quarter of 2022-23. The manufacturing sector grew by
4.7% in the first quarter of 2023-24, significantly lower
than 12.8% in the first quarter of 2022-23. The
electricity sector grew the slowest by 1.3% in the first
quarter of 2023-24 which was lower than 17.1% in the
first quarter of 2022-23.
- 2-
Monthly Policy Review – August 2023 PRS Legislative Research
Figure 2: Growth in IIP (%, year-on-year) Governor (LG) of Delhi: (i) transfers and postings,
(ii) matters related to vigilance, (iii) disciplinary
8%
7% 6.4% proceedings, and (iv) prosecution sanctions of
Group A officers of All India Services (except
6%
4.5% 4.7% Indian Police Service), and officers serving the
5%
Delhi government. Officers serving in connection
4%
with the subjects of police, public order, and land
3%
will not come under the Authority’s purview.
2% 1.3%
1% ▪ The Authority will consist of the Delhi Chief
0% Minister of Delhi, Principal Home Secretary and
-1% Chief Secretary of the Delhi. All decisions of the
-2% Authority will be based on a majority of votes of
IIP Mining Mfg Electricity the members present and voting. The quorum for a
meeting will be two members.
Apr-23 May-23 Jun-23 Apr-Jun 23
▪ Powers of the Lieutenant Governor (LG):
Sources: Ministry of Statistics and Programme Implementation; PRS. Under the Act, matters where the LG shall act on
his discretion are: (i) matters outside the legislative
Repo rate kept unchanged at 6.5%
competence of the Delhi legislature but which have
been delegated to the LG, or (ii) matters where he
The Monetary Policy Committee (MPC) of the Reserve
is required by a law to act in his discretion or
Bank of India (RBI) retained the policy repo rate (the
rate at which RBI lends money to banks) at 6.5%.4 exercise any judicial or quasi-judicial functions.
The Bill specifies that in these matters, the LG will
Other decisions of the Committee are as follows:
act in his sole discretion. It expands the
▪ The standing deposit facility rate (the rate at which discretionary role of the LG by giving him powers
the RBI borrows from banks without giving to approve the recommendations of the Authority,
collateral) has been retained at 6.25%. or return them for reconsideration. The LG’s
decision will be final in the case of a difference of
▪ The marginal standing facility rate (the rate at
opinion between him and the Authority. It also
which banks can borrow additional money from
provides the LG with the authority to override the
RBI), and the bank rate (rate at which RBI buys
Delhi government on certain matters. These
bills of exchange) have been retained at 6.75%.
matters include summoning and proroguing the
The MPC decided to remain focused on withdrawal of Delhi Legislative Assembly.
accommodation. This is in order to ensure that
For a PRS analysis of the Bill, see here.
inflation progressively aligns with the target of 4%,
while supporting growth. RBI had increased the repo
Bill to amend the Registration of Births and
rate to from 6.25% to 6.5% in February 2023.
Deaths Act, 1969, passed by Parliament
Alaya Purewal (alaya@prsindia.org)
Home Affairs
The Registration of Births and Deaths (Amendment)
Bill, 2023, was passed by Parliament.8 It amends the
The GNCT of Delhi (Amendment) Bill, 2023, Registration of Births and Deaths Act, 1969.9 The Act
passed by Parliament provides for the regulation of registration of births and
deaths. Key features of the Bill include:
Alaya Purewal (alaya@prsindia.org)
▪ Aadhaar details of parents and informants
The Government of National Capital Territory of Delhi required: The Act requires certain persons
(Amendment) Bill, 2023, was introduced in Lok Sabha (informants) to report births and deaths to the
on August 1, 2023.5 It was passed by Parliament on Registrar. For example, the medical officer in
August 7, 2023. It amends the Government of National charge of a hospital where a baby is born must
Capital Territory of Delhi Act, 1991.6 The Bill report the birth. The Bill adds that, in cases of
replaces the Government of National Capital Territory births, the informant shall also provide the
of Delhi (Amendment) Ordinance, 2023 which was Aadhaar number of the parents and the informant,
promulgated on May 19, 2023.7 The Bill will if available. This provision also applies to: (i)
retrospectively apply from May 19, 2023. Key features jailor in case of births in a jail, and (ii) manager of
include: a hotel or lodge in case of births in such a place.
Further, it expands the list of specified persons to
▪ National Capital Civil Services Authority: The
include: (i) adoptive parents for non-institutional
Bill establishes the National Capital Civil Service
adoption, (ii) biological parent for births through
Authority to recommend to the Lieutenant
surrogacy, and (iii) the parent in case of birth of a
- 3-
Monthly Policy Review – August 2023 PRS Legislative Research
child to a single parent or unwed mother. sedition, which was punishable with imprisonment
between three years and life. It instead penalises:
▪ Database of births and deaths: The Act provides
(i) exciting or attempting to excite secession, or
for the appointment of a Registrar-General, India
subversive activities, or armed rebellion, (ii)
who may issue general directions for registration
encouraging feelings of separatist activities, or (iii)
of births and deaths. The Bill adds that the
endangering sovereignty or unity and integrity of
Registrar General will maintain a national database
India. These may involve electronic
of registered births and deaths. Chief Registrars
communication, or use of financial means. This
(appointed by states) and Registrars (appointed by
will be punishable with imprisonment of up to
states for each local area jurisdiction) will be
seven years or life, and will attract a fine.
obligated to share data of registered births and
deaths to the national database. The Chief ▪ Murder by a group on certain grounds: The
Registrar shall maintain a similar database at the Bill specifies a separate penalty for murder
state level. committed by five or more people on specified
grounds. These include race, caste, sex, place of
▪ Connecting database: The Bill states that the
birth, language, or personal belief. Penalty for
national database may be made available to other
each offender includes imprisonment between
authorities preparing or maintaining other
seven years and life, or death.
databases. Such databases include: (i) population
register, (ii) electoral rolls, (iii) ration card, and ▪ Death penalty for gang rape of minor: The IPC
(iv) any other national databases as notified. The allows death penalty for gang rape of women
use of the national database must be approved by below 12 years of age. The Bill extends the death
the central government. Similarly, the state penalty for gang rape of women below 18 years.
database may be made available to authorities
For a PRS summary of the Bill, please see here.
dealing with other state databases, subject to the
state government’s approval.
Bill replacing the Code of Criminal Procedure
For a PRS analysis of the Bill, see here. introduced in Lok Sabha
Tushar Chakrabarty (tushar@prsindia.org)
Bill to replace the IPC introduced in Lok
Sabha; referred to Standing Committee
The Bharatiya Nagarik Suraksha Sanhita, 2023 was
Tanvi Vipra (tanvi@prsindia.org) introduced in Lok Sabha.12 It repeals the Code of
Criminal Procedure, 1973.13 The Bill was subsequently
The Bharatiya Nyaya Sanhita, 2023 was introduced in referred to the Standing Committee on Home Affairs.14
Lok Sabha.10 The Bill repeals the Indian Penal Code, The Code provides for the procedure for arrest,
1860 (IPC) and has been referred to the Standing prosecution, and bail for offences under various Acts
Committee on Home Affairs.11 The IPC is the including the Indian Penal Code, 1860. The Bill retains
principal law on criminal offences. The Bill retains most of the provisions of the Code. Key changes
several parts of the IPC. Certain offences under the proposed under the Bill include:
IPC that Courts have struck or read down have been
▪ Detention of undertrials: Under the Code, if an
omitted. These include offences of adultery and same-
accused has spent half of the maximum period of
sex intercourse. Key changes proposed in the Bill are:
imprisonment for an offence under detention,
▪ Terrorism and organised crime to be offences: during investigation or trial, he must be released
The Bill defines terrorism as an act that intends to on his personal bond. This does not apply to
threaten the unity, integrity, and security of the offences which are punishable by death. The Bill
country to intimidate the general public. Terrorist adds that this provision will also not apply to: (i)
acts include using firearms, bombs, or hazardous offences punishable by life imprisonment, and (ii)
substances to cause death, or spread fear. persons against whom proceedings are pending in
more than one offence. It further adds that first-
▪ Organised crime is defined as a continuing
time offenders will be released on bail if they
unlawful activity, carried out by use of violence or
have completed detention for one-third of the
intimidation, to obtain material or financial benefit.
maximum imprisonment which can be imposed
The unlawful activity may include kidnapping,
for the offence. The superintendent of the jail
contract killing, financial scams, and cybercrime.
where the accused is detained must make the
These could be carried out by individuals singly or
application seeking the release of such undertrials
jointly, as members of or on behalf of a crime
on bail.
syndicate. The maximum penalty for terrorism
and organised crime includes death, or life
imprisonment if the offence has resulted in death
of any person.
▪ Sedition: The Bill removes the offence of
- 4-
Monthly Policy Review – August 2023 PRS Legislative Research
▪ Signatures and finger impressions: The Code Information Technology
empowers a Metropolitan/Judicial Magistrate to
order any person to provide specimen signatures Pratinav Damani (pratinav@prsindia.org)
or handwriting. Such an order can be given for
any investigation or proceeding under the Code. Digital Personal Data Protection Bill, 2023
However, such specimen cannot be collected passed by Parliament
from a person who has not been arrested under
The Digital Personal Data Protection Bill, 2023 was
the investigation. The Bill expands this to
passed by Parliament on August 9, 2023.16 The Bill
include finger impressions and voice samples.
was introduced in Lok Sabha on August 3, 2023. The
These samples may also be taken from a person
Bill provides for the protection of personal data and the
who has not been arrested.
privacy of individuals. Key features include:
▪ Forensic investigation: The Bill mandates
▪ Applicability: The Bill applies to the processing
forensic investigation for offences punishable
of digital personal data within India where such
with at least seven years of imprisonment. In
data is: (i) collected online, or (ii) collected offline
such cases, forensic experts will visit crime
and is digitised. It will also apply to the processing
scenes to collect forensic evidence and record the
of personal data outside India if it is for offering
process on a mobile phone or any other electronic
goods or services in India. Personal data is defined
device. If a state does not have forensics facility,
as any data about an individual, who is identifiable
it shall utilise such facility in another state.
by or in relation to such data. Processing has been
For a PRS summary of the Bill, see here. defined as wholly or partially automated operation
or set of operations performed on digital personal
Bill replacing the Indian Evidence Act data. It includes collection, use, and sharing.
introduced in the Lok Sabha
▪ Rights and duties of data principal: An
Rutvik Upadhyaya (rutvik@prsindia.org) individual, whose data is being processed (data
principal), will have the right to: (i) obtain
The Bhartiya Sakshya Bill, 2023 was introduced in Lok information about processing, (ii) seek correction
Sabha. It repeals the Indian Evidence Act, 1872.15 The and erasure of personal data, (iii) nominate another
Act provides rules for the admissibility of evidence in person to exercise rights in the event of death or
legal proceedings. The Bill retains several parts of the incapacity, and (iv) grievance redressal. Data
Act and widens the ambit of electronic records principals will have certain duties. They must not:
admissible as evidence. Key changes proposed in the (i) register a false or frivolous complaint, and (ii)
Bill include: furnish any false particulars or impersonate another
person in specified cases. Violation of duties will
▪ Admissibility of electronic or digital records as
be punishable with a penalty of up to Rs 10,000.
evidence: The Act provides for two kinds of
evidence – documentary and oral evidence. ▪ Obligations of data fiduciaries: The entity
Documentary evidence includes information in determining the purpose and means of processing
electronic records that have been printed or stored (data fiduciary) must: (i) make reasonable efforts
in optical or magnetic media produced by a to ensure the accuracy and completeness of data,
computer. Such information may have been stored (ii) build reasonable security safeguards to prevent
or processed by a combination of computers or a data breach, (iii) inform the Data Protection
different computers. The Bill provides that Board of India and affected persons in the event of
electronic or digital records will have the same a breach, and (iv) erase personal data as soon as
legal effect as paper records. It expands electronic the purpose has been met and retention is not
records to include information stored in necessary for legal purposes (storage limitation).
semiconductor memory or any communication In case of government entities, storage limitation
devices (smartphones, laptops). This will also and the right of the data principal to erasure will
include records on emails, server logs, not apply.
smartphones, locational evidence and voice mails.
For a PRS analysis of the Bill, see here.
▪ Oral evidence: Under the Act, oral evidence
includes statements made before Courts by Standing Committee submits report on
witnesses in relation to a fact under inquiry. The Citizens’ Data Security and Privacy
Bill allows oral evidence to be given electronically.
The Standing Committee on Communications and
This would permit witnesses, accused persons, and
Information Technology (Chair: Mr. Prataprao Jadhav)
victims to testify through electronic means.
submitted its report on ‘Citizens’ Data Security and
For a PRS Summary of the Bill, see here. Privacy’.17 Key observations and recommendations of
the Committee include:
- 5-
Monthly Policy Review – August 2023 PRS Legislative Research
▪ Draft Digital Personal Data Protection Bill, the same composition of the Election Commission.
2022: The Committee noted that the Ministry It adds that the CEC and other ECs will be
incorporated questions that were raised during appointed by the President on the recommendation
previous consultations for the data protection law, of a Selection Committee.
into the 2022 draft Bill. These questions were
▪ Selection Committee: The Selection Committee
raised on the rule making powers of the central
will consist of: (i) the Prime Minister as
government, compensation from those whose
Chairperson, (ii) the Leader of the Opposition in
process data, age of consent, and the establishment
Lok Sabha as member, and (iii) a Union Cabinet
of a grievance redressal mechanism for data
Minister nominated by the Prime Minister as a
principals. The Committee recommended that the
member. If the Leader of Opposition in Lok Sabha
Ministry incorporate visual elements for consent
has not been recognised, the leader of the single
and notice mechanisms to extend benefits to
largest opposition party in Lok Sabha will assume
people who are not digitally literate.
the said role.
▪ The Committee noted that the Ministry is in the
▪ Search Committee: A Search Committee will
process of bringing a Bill to establish a framework
prepare a panel of five persons for the
for processing digital personal data while
consideration of the Selection Committee. The
balancing protecting personal data. It noted that
Search Committee will be headed by the Cabinet
implementing a suitable law will enhance data
Secretary. It will have two other members, not
security and ensure that personal information is
below the rank of Secretary to the central
safeguarded. It also noted that the 2022 draft Bill
government, having knowledge and experience in
protects personal data as a whole, without further
matters related to elections. The Selection
classification. This avoids issues of interpretation
Committee may also consider candidates who have
and classification-based protection.
not been included in the panel prepared by the
▪ Rule-making powers of central government: Search Committee.
The 2022 draft Bill contains provisions that allow
For a PRS summary of the Bill, see here.
for the delegation of legislation by prescribing
rules. Taking cognizance of the dynamic nature of
President approves the delimitation of
information technology, the Committee
appreciated the space for making subordinate
constituencies in Assam
legislation. However, they cautioned the Ministry
The President approved the delimitation of
to utilise the rule making powers judiciously and Parliamentary and Assembly constituencies in Assam.20
employ them with utmost care and responsibility.
The Order came into effect from August 16, 2023. The
As per a dissent note, there was excessive use of
Order was published by the Election Commission of
delegated legislation in the draft Bill which did not
India (ECI) under the Representation of the People Act,
specify the scope and method of implementation of 1950.21 All Assembly and Parliamentary
certain provisions.
constituencies in the state have been delimited based on
For a PRS summary of the report, see here. the 2001 Census. The last delimitation of
constituencies in Assam was carried out in 1976 based
on the 1971 Census.
Assam has 14 seats in Lok Sabha, with one seat
Election Commission
reserved for Scheduled Tribes (STs).22 The state
Legislative Assembly has 126 seats with nine seats for
Alaya Purewal (alaya@prsindia.org)
SCs and 19 seats for STs. The total number of seats in
both the Lok Sabha and Assembly have not been
Bill amending appointment of Chief Election
changed. SC Assembly seats have been increased from
Commissioner introduced
eight to nine seats, while ST Assembly seats have been
The Chief Election Commissioner and Other Election increased from 16 to 19 seats.22 Additionally,
Commissioners (Appointment, Conditions of Service Assembly constituencies in the Bodoland districts have
and Term of Office) Bill, 2023, was introduced in been increased from 11 to 15.22
Rajya Sabha.18 It repeals the Election Commission
(Conditions of Service of Election Commissioners and Standing Committee Report on Election
Transaction of Business) Act, 1991.19 Process and Reforms submitted
▪ Election Commission: As per Article 324 of the The Standing Committee on Personnel, Public
Constitution, the Election Commission consists of Grievances, Law and Justice (Chair: Mr. Sushil Kumar
the Chief Election Commissioner (CEC) and such Modi) submitted its report on “Specific Aspects of
number of other Election Commissioners (ECs), as Election Process and their Reform”.23 The Committee
the President may decide. The CEC and other ECs identified issues in the electoral process including: (i)
are appointed by the President. The Bill specifies the status of Common Electoral Roll, and the minimum
- 6-
Monthly Policy Review – August 2023 PRS Legislative Research
age of voting and contesting elections. The Election Goods and Services Tax (IGST) Act, 2017,
Commission of India (ECI) proposed establishing a respectively.26,27 As per the amendments, CGST will
Common Electoral Roll. The Common Electoral Roll be applicable on casinos, horse racing, gambling, and
would serve as a centralised repository of voter online money gaming. IGST will apply to online
information that can be accessed by all concerned money gaming. Online money gaming refers to online
authorities, including the ECI and State Election games where players pay or deposit money (including
Commissions. Key recommendations of the virtual digital assets) with the expectation of winning
Committee include: money or money’s worth. This applies to any game,
scheme, competition, or other activity irrespective of its
▪ Common Electoral Roll: The Committee noted
outcome being based on skill, chance, or both. It
that the Common Electoral Roll is intended to
includes online money games which may be allowed or
streamline resources, minimise efforts, and reduce
banned under any law.
expenses. However, it identified two issues in
implementing it: (i) the current legal framework, For a PRS summary of the Bills, see here and here.
and (ii) the constitutional regulations guiding the
creation of electoral rolls by the ECI. The SEBI releases consultation paper on review of
Committee expressed concern about the potential framework for borrowings by large corporates
impact on state powers, as panchayat elections and
municipal elections are under the authority of State The Securities and Exchange Board of India (SEBI)
Election Commissions. Delimitation of local issued a consultation paper on review of framework of
wards and panchayats is mandated by the state borrowings by large corporates.28 Large corporates are
governments and State Election Commissions entities which have: (i) an outstanding long-term
before every local election. As per the Seventh borrowing of at least Rs 100 crore, (ii) credit rating of
Schedule of the Constitution, local elections are a AA and above, and (iii) specified/debt securities listed
state subject. The ECI lacks the authority to direct on a stock exchange. Currently, large corporates must
State Election Commissions. Therefore, the raise at least 25% of their borrowings in a financial
Committee recommended that the ECI should year by issuing debt securities. However, raising funds
consider the constitutional provisions before from banks and financial institutions is seen to be more
preparing the Common Electoral Roll. cost effective as compared to issuing debt securities.
Key proposals include:
▪ Further, the Committee noted that implementing
the Common Electoral Roll proposed by the ▪ Threshold of borrowings: SEBI has proposed to
central government and the ECI falls outside the increase the threshold to identify large corporates
scope of Article 325 of the Constitution. Article based on their outstanding long-term borrowings
325 mandates the use of separate electoral rolls for from Rs 100 crore to Rs 500 crore. This would
elections to Parliament and state legislatures. The allow companies below the proposed threshold to
Committee advised the central government to prepare themselves for compliance once the
carefully assess the potential consequences before framework becomes applicable to them.
taking any actions.
▪ Definition of outstanding borrowings:
▪ Age of contesting elections: The Committee Outstanding long-term borrowings and incremental
observed that reducing the minimum age borrowings (borrowings raised during a year) do
requirement for candidacy in elections would give not include external commercial borrowings and
young individuals equal opportunities to engage in inter-corporate borrowings between a parent
democracy. It suggested reducing the minimum company and its subsidiaries. SEBI proposes to
age requirement for candidacy in state elections. exclude certain other types of borrowings such as:
(i) inter-corporate borrowings between a holding
For a PRS summary of the Report, see here. company, its subsidiaries, and/or associate
companies, and (ii) grants, deposits, or other funds
received as per directions or guidelines of the
central government.
Finance
RBI issues framework for floating interest rate
Tushar Chakrabarty (tushar@prsindia.org)
on monthly instalments
Parliament passes amendments to extend GST
The Reserve Bank of India (RBI) released a framework
on certain activities for resetting floating interest rates in equated monthly
instalments (EMIs).29 When sanctioning EMI based
The Central Goods and Services Tax (Amendment)
floating rate personal loans, regulated entities (such as
Bill, 2023 and the Integrated Goods and Services Tax
banks) are required to account for the borrower’s
(Amendment) Bill, 2023 were passed by
repayment capacity. Regulated entities should ensure
Parliament.24,25 They amend the Central Goods and
that sufficient headroom exists to provide for increases
Services Tax (CGST) Act, 2017 and the Integrated
in loan tenor and/or increase in EMI. Such an increase
- 7-
Monthly Policy Review – August 2023 PRS Legislative Research
can happen due to the increase in the external The instructions will apply from January 1, 2024.
benchmark rate (such as the repo rate). RBI has
received consumer grievances on increases in loan SEBI issues consultation paper on voluntary
tenor and/or increases in EMI amounts without proper delisting of shares
communication or consent of the borrower. Key
features of the policy include: The Securities and Exchange Board of India (SEBI)
issued a consultation paper on the review of voluntary
▪ Disclosure to borrowers: At the time of delisting norms under SEBI (Delisting of Equity
sanctioning loans, regulated entities must clearly Shares) Regulations, 2021.31 Delisting regulations
communicate the possible impact of changes in allows the acquirer/promoter of a company to provide
benchmark interest rates on the loan tenor, EMI, or public shareholders an exit opportunity if the company
both. Any increase must be communicated to the is sought to be delisted from stock exchanges. Key
borrower immediately. proposals include:
▪ Fixed interest rate: When resetting interest rates, ▪ Counter-offer for delisting: If the post-offer
borrowers must be given the option to switch to a shareholding of the acquirer does not reach 90% of
fixed interest rate. The policy framed by regulated the total issued share of the company, the delisting
entities may specify the number of times a offer is considered to be failed. If the 90%
borrower will be allowed to switch during the threshold is met, a discovered price is determined.
tenor of the loan. All charges for switching loans If the discovered price is not acceptable to the
from floating to fixed rate must be transparently acquirer, he can make a counter offer. A sub-
disclosed in the loan sanction letter. group of the Primary Market Advisory Committee
has proposed that the acquirer can make a counter
▪ Options for borrowers: The borrowers must be
offer even if the 90% threshold is not met. The
allowed to opt for: (i) an increase in EMI, loan
acquirer may make a counter offer if the bids
tenor, or combination of both and (ii) prepaying
received are higher of the difference between: (i)
the loan at any point during its tenor.
the acquirer’s shareholding and 75% of the total
The framework will apply to new and existing loans by issued shares of the company, and (ii) 50% of the
December 31, 2023. public shareholding.
▪ Determination of counter-offer price: In case the
RBI issues instructions for penal charges in
acquirer makes a counter-offer, the counter-offer
loan accounts
price will be the higher of: (i) the volume weighted
The Reserve Bank of India (RBI) issued instructions on average price of the shares offered by public
the levy of penal interest/charges on loans.30 Penal shareholders, and (ii) the initial floor price
interest/charges are levied to inculcate credit discipline. determined per regulations.
Such charges are not meant to be used for revenue
Comments are invited until September 4, 2023.
enhancement over and above the contracted rate of
interest. Supervisory reviews by RBI have indicated
SEBI notifies framework for delisting of debt
divergent practices amongst regulated entities (such as
securities
banks) for penal interest/charges on loans. Key
instructions include: The Securities and Exchange Board of India (SEBI)
notified amendments to the SEBI (Listing Obligations
▪ Levying penal charges: Penalty for non-
and Disclosure Requirements), 2015.32,33 The
compliance of material terms and conditions of the
amendments provide the framework for the voluntary
loan must be treated as penal charges and not as
delisting of non-convertible debt securities and non-
penal interest. There must be no capitalisation of
convertible redeemable preference shares. Such
penal charges, which implies that no interest
preference shares cannot be converted into equity
should be computed on such charges. The
shares. Key features include:
quantum of penal charges shall be reasonable and
commensurate with non-compliance of material ▪ Approval of stock exchange: A listed entity must
terms and conditions of the loan contract. seek an in-principle approval of the relevant stock
exchange for delisting of the specified securities.
▪ Individual borrowers: Penal charges on loans
The approval is to be taken within 15 working days
given to individual borrowers for non-business
from the passing of the delisting resolution by the
purposes must not be higher than such charges on
entity’s board.
loans to non-individual borrowers.
▪ Obligations of the listed entity: The listed entity
▪ Disclosure to borrowers: The quantum and
must start the process to obtain approval from the
reason for penal charges must be clearly disclosed
holders of the debt securities and preference
in the loan agreement. The Regulated entities must
shares. This has to be done within three working
not introduce any additional components to the
days of the grant of in-principle approval by the
interest rate.
stock exchange.
- 8-
Monthly Policy Review – August 2023 PRS Legislative Research
▪ Failure of delisting proposal: The delisting reconnaissance or prospecting, or both activities
proposal will be deemed to have failed in case of for specified minerals.
non-receipt of: (i) in-principle approval from stock
▪ The exploration licence will be issued for 29
exchanges, (ii) requisite approval from holders of
minerals specified in the Seventh Schedule. These
non-convertible debt securities or non-convertible
include gold, silver, copper, cobalt, nickel, lead,
redeemable preference shares, or (ii) a no-
potash, and rock phosphate. These also include six
objection letter from the debenture trustee if
minerals classified as atomic minerals under the
delisting debt securities.
Act: (i) beryl and beryllium, (ii) lithium, (iii)
niobium, (iv) titanium, (v) tantallium, and (vi)
SEBI releases consultation paper on
zirconium. The Bill declassifies them as atomic
performance validation agency
minerals. The Act reserves prospecting and
The Securities and Exchange Board of India (SEBI) mining of atomic minerals for government entities.
released a consultation paper on performance
▪ Auction of certain minerals by the central
validation agency.34 SEBI registered
government: Under the Act, auction of
intermediaries/entities showcase their performance to
concessions is undertaken by the state
attract more clients. However, some of these entities
governments, except in certain specified cases.
may make inflated performance claims to attract more
The Bill adds that auction for composite licence
clients. This can mislead investors. SEBI has
and mining lease for specified critical and strategic
proposed to create an independent performance
minerals will be conducted by the central
validation agency to validate the claims related to
government. These minerals include lithium,
performance made by various intermediaries and
cobalt, nickel, phosphate, potash, tin, phosphate,
entities. Performance claims shall be validated based
and potash. However, concessions will still be
on specific parameters such as returns, risk, and
granted by the state government.
volatility. The agency will maintain confidentiality of
the information received during its evaluation process. For a PRS summary of the Bill, please see here.
Comments are invited by September 21, 2023.
Offshore Areas Mineral (Development and
Regulation) Amendment Bill, 2023 passed by
Parliament
Mines
The Offshore Areas Mineral (Development and
Regulation) Amendment Bill was passed by
Pratinav Damani (pratinav@prsindia.org)
Parliament. The Bill amends the Offshore Areas
Mineral (Development and Regulation) Act, 2002.37
Mines and Minerals (Development and
The Act regulates offshore mining in the maritime
Regulation) Amendment Bill, 2023 passed by zones of India.38
Parliament
▪ Introduction of a composite licence: The Bill
The Mines and Minerals (Development and introduces a composite licence for granting rights
Regulation) Amendment Bill, 2023 was passed by for exploration and production operations. Under
Parliament. The Bill amends the Mines and Minerals the composite license, the licensee will be required
(Development and Regulation) Act, 1957.35 The Act to complete exploration within three years. This
regulates the mining sector.36 may be extended by two years upon application by
the licensee. If mineral resources have been
▪ Reconnaissance to include sub-surface
established, the licensee will be granted one or
activities: The Act defines reconnaissance
more production leases for the explored area. The
operations as operations undertaken for
production lease will be valid for 50 years.
preliminary prospecting and includes: (i) aerial
surveys, (ii) geophysical, and (iii) geochemical ▪ Auction mandatory for certain concessions: The
surveys. It also includes geological mapping. The Act provides for the grant of concessions through
Act prohibits pitting, trenching, drilling, and administrative allocation. The Bill mandates
subsurface excavation as part of reconnaissance; competitive bidding for a production lease and a
the Bill allows these activities. composite license to private entities. Applications
for production leases before the date on which
▪ Exploration licence for specified minerals: The
provisions of the Bill come into effect, will be
Act provides for the following types of
void. An exploration licence granted before the
concessions: (i) a reconnaissance permit for
date on which provisions of the Bill come into
reconnaissance, (ii) a prospecting licence for
effect will be ineligible to acquire a production
prospecting, (iii) mining lease for undertaking
lease on the explored area.
mining, and (iv) a composite licence, for
prospecting and mining. The Bill introduces an ▪ Offshore Areas Mineral Trust: The Bill sets up
exploration licence, which will authorise either the Offshore Areas Mineral Trust. Concession
- 9-
Monthly Policy Review – August 2023 PRS Legislative Research
holders will be required to pay an amount to the provide that the Chairperson of the Board will be
Trust in addition to any royalty. The funds will be nominated by the Visitor.
used for specified purposes including: (i)
▪ NITIE, Mumbai: The Bill classifies the National
exploration in offshore areas, (ii) research and
Institute of Industrial Engineering (NITIE),
studies about the mitigation of adverse effects of
Mumbai as IIM Mumbai.
offshore mining on the ecology, and (iii) relief
upon the occurrence of a disaster. For a PRS Summary of the Bill, see here.
For a PRS summary of the Bill, please see here.
New National Curriculum Framework for
Education released
The Ministry of Education released the National
Education
Curriculum Framework for School Education (NCF),
2023.40,41 It aims to provide the guiding principles,
Rutvik Upadhyaya (rutvik@prsindia.org)
goals, structure, and elements for the development of
school curricula. It replaces the National Curriculum
Parliament passes Bill to alter the governance
Framework, 2005.42 It has been formulated in
structure of IIMs
pursuance of the objectives of the National Education
The Indian Institutes of Management (Amendment) Policy (NEP).43 The NEP envisioned changes in
Bill, 2023 was passed by Parliament.39 The Bill school education, which included: (i) a schooling
amends the Indian Institutes of Management Act, 2017. system divided across four stages, (ii) multidisciplinary
The Act declares Indian Institutes of Management education, (iii) multilingualism, and (iv) flexibility in
(IIMs) as institutes of national importance and subject selection. Key features include:
regulates their functioning. IIMs provide post-graduate
▪ 5+3+3+4 stage design: The NEP recommended
education in the field of management and allied areas.
substituting the existing design of the school
Key features of the Bill include:
system (10+2) with a design that is distributed
▪ Visitor: The Bill designates the President of India across four stages. The proposed design involved
as Visitor of every Institute covered by the Act. – (i) a foundational stage (ages 3-8), (ii) a
The Visitor is granted powers that include: (i) preparatory stage (ages 8-11), (iii) a middle stage
initiating inquiries into the functioning of IIMs, (ii) (ages 11-14), and (iv) a secondary stage (ages 14-
taking action against Institutes to ensure 18). The NEP further proposed dividing the
compliance, and (iii) appointing the Chairperson of secondary stage into two phases — grades 9 and
the Co-ordination Forum. 10, and grades 11 and 12. The NCF, 2023
incorporates this design. It provides each stage
▪ Appointment and removal of IIM Directors:
with a different combination of disciplines and
Under the Act, the Director of an IIM is appointed
specific learning objectives. For example, the
by the Board of Governors, based on the
foundational stage aims to develop physical,
recommendations of a Search-cum-Selection
cognitive, and language abilities. In this stage,
Committee. The Bill mandates the Board to obtain
students will learn two languages, and develop
the prior approval of the Visitor before appointing
foundational numeracy.
an Institute Director. The procedure for selecting
the Director will be prescribed by the central ▪ Language education: The NEP aims to develop a
government. Under the Act, the Search Committee student into an independent speaker, writer, and
comprises of the Chairperson of the Board, and reader in three languages. The NCF, 2023
three members from amongst eminent incorporates this aim and delineates goals for
administrators, industrialists, educationists. The language proficiency. The first language a student
Bill reduces these three members to two, and adds studies would be that of the community in which
another member to be nominated by the Visitor. that student lives. The others could be any
languages other than the first. The NCF
▪ Under the Act, the Board may remove the Director
necessitates that two out of the three languages
from office on grounds such as: (i) insolvency, (ii)
taught must be Indian.
mental and physical incapacity, (iii) conflict of
interest. The Bill adds that the Board will require ▪ Multidisciplinary education: The NCF, 2023
prior approval of the Visitor before removing a provides for students in grades 11 and 12 to study
Director. The Bill also grants the Visitor the six subjects. Two of these would be languages, of
authority to terminate the services of the Director, which, one must be Indian. Apart from these, the
as may be prescribed. student can choose any four subjects from three
groups. Each group contains subjects from similar
▪ Appointment of the Chairperson of the Board
domains. For instance, science, mathematics and
of Governors: Under the Act, the Chairperson of
computational thinking are grouped together.
the Board of Governors of each Institute is
appointed by the board. The Bill amends this to
- 10-
Monthly Policy Review – August 2023 PRS Legislative Research
Health The National Nursing and Midwifery
Commission Bill, 2023 passed
Parliament passes Bill to regulate dentistry and Priyadarshini Jain (priyadarshini@prsindia.org)
dental education in India.
The National Nursing and Midwifery Commission Bill,
Rutvik Upadhyaya (rutvik@prsindia.org)
2023 was passed by Parliament.45 It repeals the Indian
Nursing Council Act, 1947.46 The Bill provides for the
The National Dental Commission Bill, 2023 was
regulation and maintenance of standards of education
passed by Parliament.44 The Bill repeals the Dentists
and services for nursing and midwifery professionals.
Act, 1948 and constitutes: (i) the National Dental
Key features of the Bill are:
Commission, (ii) the Dental Advisory Council, and (iii)
three autonomous Boards for regulating dental ▪ National Nursing and Midwifery Commission:
education and standards of dentistry. Key features of The Bill provides for the constitution of the
the Bill include: National Nursing and Midwifery Commission. It
will consist of 29 members. The Chairperson
▪ National Dental Commission: The central
should have a postgraduate degree in nursing and
government is required to constitute a National
midwifery with at least 20 years of field experience.
Dental Commission consisting of 33 members. It
Ex-officio members include representatives from
will be chaired by an eminent and experienced
the Department of Health and Family Welfare, the
dentist. The Chairperson will be appointed by the
National Medical Commission, Military Nursing
central government, upon the recommendation of a
Services, and the Directorate General of Health
search-cum-selection committee. The Search
Services. Other members include nursing and
Committee will be chaired by the Cabinet
midwifery professionals, and one representative
Secretary. Ex-officio members of the Commission
from charitable institutions.
include: (i) Presidents of the three autonomous
Boards, (ii) the Director General of Health ▪ Functions of Commission: Functions of the
Services, (iii) Chief of the Centre for Dental and Commission include: (i) framing policies and
Educational Research, AIIMS. Part time members regulating standards for nursing and midwifery
of the Commission include: (i) faculties of education, (ii) regulating nursing and midwifery
dentistry from government institutes and (ii) institutions, (iii) providing a uniform process for
representatives of states and union territories. admission into such institutions, and (iv) providing
standards for faculty in teaching institutions
▪ Functions of the Commission include: (i)
regulating governance standards for dental ▪ Autonomous boards: The Bill provides for the
education, examination, and training, (ii) constitution of three autonomous boards under the
regulating dental institutions and research, (iii) supervision of the National Commission. These
assessing infrastructure requirements in dental are: (i) the Nursing and Midwifery Undergraduate
healthcare, and (iv) ensuring that admissions to and Postgraduate Education Board, to regulate
Bachelor of Dental Surgery happen through the education and examination at undergraduate and
National Eligibility-cum-Entrance Test (NEET). postgraduate levels; (ii) the Nursing and Midwifery
Assessment and Rating Board, to provide the
▪ Autonomous Boards: The central government is
framework for assessing and rating nursing and
required to constitute three autonomous Boards
midwifery institutions; and (iii) the Nursing and
under the supervision of the Commission. The
Midwifery Ethics and Registration Board, to
Boards are: (i) the undergraduate and postgraduate
regulate professional conduct and promote ethics in
Dental Education Board - responsible for
the profession.
determining education standards and granting
recognition to dental qualifications, (ii) the Dental For a PRS Bill Summary, please see here.
Assessment and Rating Board - responsible for
determining compliance assessment procedure for CAG submits its audit report on Ayushman
dental institutions, and conducting inspections and Bharat-PMJAY
ratings, and (iii) the Ethics and Dental Registration
Board – responsible for maintaining online Rutvik Upadhyaya (rutvik@prsindia.org)
national registers of dentists/dental auxiliaries,
suspending/cancelling licenses, and regulating The Comptroller Auditor General of India (CAG)
standards of conduct. submitted its report on the ‘Performance Audit of
Ayushman Bharat – Pradhan Mantri Jan Aarogya
For a PRS Summary of the Bill, see here Yojana (PMJAY)’.47 The Scheme aims to provide
health cover of five lakh rupees per family per year for
secondary and tertiary care hospitalisation.
Beneficiaries under the scheme are selected on the
- 11-
Monthly Policy Review – August 2023 PRS Legislative Research
basis of the Socio-Economic Caste Census (SECC), Standing Committee on Health and Family
2011. Key findings of the report include: Welfare submits report on mental health
▪ Inclusion of beneficiaries: On applying for Rutvik Upadhyaya (rutvik@prsindia.org)
registration, applicant details are matched to a
database containing a list of eligible beneficiaries. The Standing Committee on Health and Family
A matching score between 0 and 100 is generated Welfare (Chair: Mr. Bhubaneswar Kalita) submitted its
and relevant documents are sent for approval. No report on ‘Mental Health Care and Its Management in
threshold for a matching score has been prescribed Contemporary Times’.49 Mental health refers to a state
for approval or rejection. The CAG report shows of mental well-being that enables people to cope with
that in 32% of the total approved cases (11 crore) the stresses of life. The Committee noted that mental
there was no matching score, and in 15%, the health related issues are rising. It aimed to examine the
matching score was zero. This implies that the status of infrastructure, regulatory structure, and causes
details furnished by the applicants did not match behind its prevalence. Key observations and
the details in the database. The report also recommendations include:
observed the inclusion of ineligible beneficiaries,
▪ Status of mental health in India: The Ministry of
especially families of government employees.
Health and Welfare had commissioned a mental
▪ Error in Database: The report deems the SECC, health survey in 2015-16. The Survey played a
2011 database outdated and reveals crucial role in highlighting the state of mental
inconsistencies. These include errors such as: (i) health in India, with high treatment gaps for most
invalid names, (ii) blank name and gender mental illnesses. A treatment gap is the difference
columns, (iii) unrealistic birth dates and household between the requirement and access to treatment.
sizes. These add up to approximately two crore
▪ The Committee observed that the issues
entries. The report also reveals inconsistencies in
highlighted in the 2015-16 survey have remained
PMJAY data on beneficiaries. These include: (i)
the same in 2023. It noted that there is
duplicate PMJAY IDs, (ii) unrealistic household
considerable scope to improve the treatment gap.
size, (iii) same/erroneous Aadhar Card numbers,
Reasons for the gap include lack of mental health
and (iv) invalid mobiles numbers.
professionals, weak infrastructure, and stigma.
▪ Claims Management: 53% of the claims settled
▪ The Committee also observed that while the
till 2022 belonged to states that implemented their
Survey was useful, it had several issues which can
own insurance health schemes, such as Andhra
be addressed in subsequent iterations. Issues
Pradesh, Rajasthan, Maharashtra. In these states
included: (i) having a small sample size of
claims for all state schemes are fed into their own
respondents, (ii) relying on self-reporting instead
IT management systems. When this data is
of clinical trials, and (iii) excluding specific
transferred into PMJAY’s management system,
vulnerable populations such as prisoners.
there is a possibility of an overlap of PMJAY with
state specific schemes. ▪ Availability of mental health professionals:
India currently has 0.75 psychiatrists per lakh
Parliament passed the Pharmacy (Amendment) people, which is significantly low. The Committee
Bill, 2023 observed that if India targets having three
psychiatrists per lakh people, it will need 27,000
Rutvik Upadhyaya (rutvik@prsindia.org)
more psychiatrists. This scenario is similar for
other professionals such as psychologists,
The Pharmacy (Amendment) Bill, 2023 was passed by
psychiatric social workers, and nurses. The
Parliament.48 The Bill amends the Pharmacy Act,
Committee also suggested increasing the seats for
1948, which regulates the practice and profession of
MD Psychiatry.
pharmacy. Registration under the Pharmacy Act, 1948
is mandatory to practice pharmacy in India. The Bill For a PRS Summary of the Report, see here.
specifies that anyone who is registered as a pharmacist
under the Jammu and Kashmir Pharmacy Act, 2011 or
possesses suitable qualifications delineated in the same
will be deemed to be registered as a pharmacist under Law and Justice
the Pharmacy Act, 1948. This will be contingent upon
the person submitting an application for registration Alaya Purewal (alaya@prsindia.org)
within a year of the amendment coming into force, and
paying a prescribed fee. The Mediation Bill 2021 passed by Parliament
For a PRS Summary of the Bill, see here. ▪ The Mediation Bill, 2021 was passed by Parliament.50
Mediation is a form of alternative dispute resolution,
where parties attempt to settle their dispute (outside
courts) with the assistance of an independent third
- 12-
Monthly Policy Review – August 2023 PRS Legislative Research
person (mediator). The Bill seeks to promote any payment, or (iii) frequents places such as the
mediation (including online mediation and community precincts of civil or criminal courts, revenue-
mediation), and provide for enforcement of settlement offices, or railway stations to procure such
agreements resulting from mediation. The Bill was employment. The Court or judge may exclude
referred to the Standing Committee on Personnel, from the premises of the Court any person whose
Public Grievances, Law and Justice. The Committee name is included in the list of touts.
recommended changes to the Bill such as reducing the
▪ Preparation of lists: The authorities empowered
mediation process from 180 days with another 180-day
to frame and publish the list of touts may order
extension to 90 days with a 60-day extension.51 Key
subordinate courts to hold an inquiry into the
features of the Bill include:
conduct of persons alleged or suspected to be touts.
▪ Disputes not fit for mediation: The Bill will Once such a person is proven to be a tout, his name
apply to certain mediation proceedings conducted may be included by the authority in the list of
in India (for instance, if the mediation agreement touts. No individual will be included in such lists
states that mediation will be as per this Bill, or to without getting an opportunity of showing cause
international mediation related to a commercial against his inclusion.
dispute). The Bill defines certain disputes as not
For a PRS summary of the Bill, see here.
fit for mediation. These include disputes: (i)
relating to claims against minors or persons of
Standing Committee submits report on Judicial
unsound mind, (ii) involving prosecution for
Process and Reforms
criminal offences, and (iii) relating to levy or
collection of taxes. The central government may The Standing Committee on Personnel, Public
amend this list of disputes. Grievances, and Law and Justice (Chair: Mr Sushil
Kumar Modi) submitted its report on “Judicial Process
▪ Mediation process: In case of civil or commercial
and their Reforms”.55 Key recommendations of the
disputes, a person must try to settle the dispute by
Committee include:
mediation before approaching any court or certain
tribunals as notified. Mediation proceedings will ▪ Regional benches of the Supreme Court: The
be confidential. The mediation process must be Committee observed that the Supreme Court being
completed within 120 days, which may be Delhi-centric creates a significant hurdle for
extended by another 60 days by the parties. litigants coming from faraway areas of the country.
The Committee recommended the establishment of
▪ Mediators: Mediators assist the parties to settle
four or five regional benches of the apex Court. It
their dispute. Mediators may be appointed by: (i)
suggested that the regional benches may decide
the parties by agreement, or (ii) a mediation
appellate matters, while constitutional matters may
service provider (an institution administering
be dealt with at Delhi.
mediation). Mediators must disclose any conflict
of interest that may raise doubts on their ▪ Social diversity in the appointment of judges:
independence. Parties may then choose to replace The Committee observed that the higher judiciary
the mediator. Further, the Mediation Council of (Supreme Court and High Courts) suffers from a
India will register mediators, and recognise diversity deficit. It noted that the representation of
mediation service providers. Scheduled Castes (SCs), Scheduled Tribes (STs),
Other Backward Classes, women, and minorities is
For a PRS analysis of the Bill, please see here.
far below the desired levels and does not reflect
India’s social diversity. For instance, since 2018,
Bill to amend the Advocates Act, 1961, passed
the percentage of High Court judges appointed
by Rajya Sabha from SC communities was 3% and 1.5% from ST
communities. It suggested that the Supreme Court
The Advocates (Amendment) Bill, 2023, was passed by
and High Court’s Collegiums should recommend
Rajya Sabha.52 The Bill repeals certain sections related
an adequate number of women and candidates
to touts under the Legal Practitioners Act, 1879 and
from marginalised communities including
incorporate them in the Advocates Act, 1961.53,54 The
minorities. It recommended that the Department of
1961 Act consolidates the law related to legal
Justice collect data of the social status of judges
practitioners and constitutes Bar Councils and the All-
presently serving in the higher judiciary.
India Bar. Key features of the Bill include:
▪ Retirement age for judges: The Committee
▪ Touts: The Bill provides that every High Court,
observed that the retirement age of judges needs to
district judge, sessions judge, district magistrate,
be increased to keep pace with advances in medical
and revenue officer (not below the rank of a
sciences and increased longevity. Currently, the
district collector) may frame and publish lists of
retirement age for Supreme Court judges is 65
touts. Tout refers to a person who: (i) either
years and 62 years for High Court judges. It
proposes to procure or procures the employment of
recommended increasing the retirement age for
a legal practitioner in a legal business in return of
- 13-
Monthly Policy Review – August 2023 PRS Legislative Research
Supreme Court and High Court judges and Defence
amending the relevant Articles of the Constitution.
Tushar Chakrabarty (tushar@prsindia.org)
For a PRS summary of the Bill, see here.
Parliament passed the Inter-services
Organisations Bill, 2023
Cooperation Parliament passed the Inter-services Organisations
(Command, Control and Discipline) Bill, 2023.58 It
Alaya Purewal (alaya@prsindia.org)
seeks to empower the Commander-in-Chief or
Officer-in-Command of Inter-services Organisations
The Multi-State Co-operative Societies
to exercise disciplinary or administrative control over
(Amendment) Bill, 2022 passed by Parliament the service personnel under their command,
irrespective of their service. The Bill was referred to
The Multi-State Co-operative Societies (Amendment)
Joint Parliamentary Committee, which approved the
Bill, 2022, was passed by Parliament.56 It amends the
Bill. Key features of the Bill include:
Multi-State Co-operative Societies Act, 2002.57 Multi
state co-operative societies operate in more than one ▪ Inter-services Organisation: Existing Inter-
state. The Bill was referred to a Joint Parliamentary services Organisations will be deemed to have
Committee on December 22, 2022. The Committee been constituted under the Bill. These include
approved the provisions of the Bill. Key provisions of the Andaman and Nicobar Command, the
the Bill include: Defence Space Agency, and the National Defence
Academy. The central government may
▪ Election of board members: Under the Act,
constitute an Inter-services Organisation which
elections to the board of a multi-state co-operative
has personnel belonging to at least two of the
society are conducted by its existing board. The
three services: the army, the navy, and the air
Bill amends this to specify that the central
force. These may be placed under the command
government will establish the Co-operative
of an Officer-in-Command. These organisations
Election Authority to conduct such elections. The
may also include a Joint Services Command,
Authority will consist of a chairperson, vice-
which may be placed under the command of a
chairperson, and up to three members appointed by
Commander-in-Chief.
the central government on the recommendations of
a selection committee. ▪ Control of Inter-services Organisations:
Presently, the Commander-in-Chief or Officer-in-
▪ Redressal of complaints: As per the Bill, the
Command of Inter-services Organisations are not
central government will appoint one or more Co-
empowered to exercise disciplinary or
operative Ombudsman with territorial jurisdiction.
administrative powers over the personnel
The Ombudsman shall inquire into complaints
belonging to other services. The Bill empowers
made by members of co-operative societies
the Commander-in-Chief or the Officer-in-
regarding: (i) their deposits, (ii) equitable benefits
Command of an Inter-services Organisation to
of the society’s functioning, or (iii) issues affecting
exercise command and control over the personnel
the individual rights of the members. The
serving in or attached to it. He would be
Ombudsman shall complete the process of inquiry
responsible for maintaining discipline and
and adjudication within three months from the
ensuring discharge of duties by service personnel.
receipt of the complaint. Appeals against the
directions of the Ombudsman may be filed with ▪ The superintendence of an Inter-services
the Central Registrar (appointed by the central Organisation will be vested in the central
government) within a month. government. The government may also issue
directions to such organisations on grounds of
▪ Amalgamation of co-operative societies: The Act
national security, general administration, or
provides for the amalgamation and division of
public interest.
multi-state co-operative societies. This can be
done by passing a resolution at a general assembly For a PRS summary of the Bill, see here.
with at least two-thirds of the members, present
and voting. The Bill allows co-operative societies
(registered under state laws) to merge into an
existing multi-state co-operative society. At least
two-thirds of the members of the co-operative
society present and voting at a general meeting
must pass a resolution to allow such a merger.
For a PRS analysis of the Bill, see here.
- 14-
Monthly Policy Review – August 2023 PRS Legislative Research
Information and Broadcasting ▪ Power of CBFC to make modifications: The
Committee discussed whether the Board should: (i)
Pratinav Damani (pratinav@prsindia.org) simply certify films, (ii) be allowed to make
cuts/excisions before certifying films or (iii) not
The Press and Registration of Periodicals Bill, regulate films at all. It noted that a simple
2023 passed by Rajya Sabha certification model provides viewers with the
choice of content. CBFC noted that filmmakers
The Press and Registration of Periodicals Bill, 2023
often volunteer to make cuts as they are unaware
was passed by Rajya Sabha, and is pending before Lok
whether particular scenes violate the regulations.
Sabha. It repeals and replaces the Press and
Registration of Books Act, 1867.59 The Act provides ▪ However, the Committee noted that the number of
for the registration of newspapers, periodicals, and films that have been certified without cuts has
books.60 Key features of the Bill include: sharply reduced. The Committee noted that
deliberation and certification is warranted in a
▪ Registration of periodicals: The Bill provides for
diverse country like India, where people’s
the registration of periodicals, which include any
sensibilities must be accounted for. At the same
publication containing public news or comments
time there is a need to protect the freedom of
on public news. Periodicals do not include books
speech and artistic expression. The Committee
or scientific and academic journals.
suggested that CBFC strike a balance between
▪ Foreign periodicals to require prior approval: these two. It also suggested that a new
An exact reproduction of a foreign periodical may certification model with more objective parameters
be printed in India only with the prior approval of be determined with the changing ways of creating
the central government. The manner of and consuming content.
registration of such periodicals will be prescribed.
▪ Composition of the Board: CBFC has 12-25
▪ Press Registrar General of India: The Bill members who are eminent personalities from
establishes the Press Registrar General of India spheres such as education, art, film, and social
who will issue registration certificates for all sciences. The Committee noted that CBFC has
periodicals. Other functions of the Press Registrar adequate numerical strength and has sufficient
General include: (i) maintaining a register of representation of women. However, it
periodicals, (ii) making guidelines for the recommended making it obligatory to have one-
admissibility of title of periodicals, and (iii) third women members. It also suggested that
revising, suspending, or cancelling registration. CBFC should have some representation from the
general public to ensure inclusivity.
▪ Suspension and cancellation of registration: The
Bill allows the Press Registrar General to suspend ▪ Initiatives for individuals with special needs: In
the registration of a periodical for a period between October 2019, the Ministry had issued an advisory
30 days and 180 days. The registration may be to make films more accessible by using audio
suspended on the following grounds: (i) obtaining descriptions and closed captioning. Since then,
registration by furnishing false information, (ii) only one film has been certified as accessible. The
failing to publish periodicals continuously, and (iii) Committee urged the Ministry to ensure tangible
giving false particulars in annual statements. The outcomes for such initiatives.
Press Registrar General may cancel the registration
if the publisher does not correct such defects. The
registration may also be cancelled if: (i) a
Communications
periodical has the same or similar title as any other
periodical, (ii) the owner/ publisher has been
Pratinav Damani (pratinav@prsindia.org)
convicted of a terrorist act or unlawful activity, or
for acting against the security of the state.
The Post Office Bill, 2023 introduced in Rajya
For a PRS summary of the Bill, see here. Sabha
Standing Committee submits report on the The Post Office Bill, 2023 was introduced in Rajya
Sabha on August 10, 2023. The Bill repeals and
functioning of the Central Board of Film
replaces the Indian Post Office Act, 1898.62 The Act
Certification
provides for matters relating to the functioning of the
The Standing Committee on Communications and Post Office.63 Key features of the Bill include:
Information Technology (Chair: Mr. Prataprao Jadhav)
▪ Removal of certain privileges of the central
released its report on ‘Review of Functioning of
government: The Act provides that wherever the
Central Board of Film Certification’ on August 1,
central government establishes posts, it will have
2023.61 Key observations and recommendations of the
the exclusive privilege of conveying letters by
Committee include:
post, as well as incidental services such as
- 15-
Monthly Policy Review – August 2023 PRS Legislative Research
receiving, collecting, and delivering letters. The each cell.
Bill does not provide for such privileges.
▪ Small cells could be installed on street furniture.
However, the central government will have the
The amended Rules now define street furniture to
exclusive privilege of issuing postage stamps.
include: (i) electricity poles/posts, (ii) street lights,
▪ Power to intercept shipments: The Act allows (iii) traffic lights, (iv) taxi stands, (v) bus stands,
for the interception of shipments being transmitted (vi) memorials, and (vii) utility poles.
through the post on certain grounds. An
▪ The amended Rules state that the central
interception may be carried out on the occurrence
authorities cannot charge administrative fees or
of any public emergency, or in the interest of
compensation for small cells deployed on
public safety or tranquillity. Such interceptions
structures under their control. However, power
may be carried out by the central government, state
charges and other fixtures provided by building
governments, or any authorised officer.
owners may be levied.
▪ The Bill provides that the interception of a
shipment being transmitted through post may be TRAI releases consultation paper on review of
carried out on the following grounds: (i) security quality-of-service standards
of the state, (ii) friendly relations with foreign
states, (iii) public order, emergency, or public The Telecom Regulatory Authority of India (TRAI)
safety, or (iv) contravention of the provisions of released a consultation paper on "Review of Quality of
the Bill or any other law. An officer empowered Service in Access Services (Wireless and Wireline) and
by the central government through a notification Broadband Services (Wireless and Wireline)".67
may carry out an interception. Currently, three separate regulations on the quality of
service are in force, which apply to: (i) broadband
▪ Removal of offences and penalties: The Act services, (ii) calling services, and (iii) wireless data.67
prescribed penalties for several offences such as These regulations mandate reporting certain
theft, misappropriation, and the destruction of performance metrics on service quality. This includes
postal articles. The Jan Vishwas (Amendment of concerns such as network availability and call quality.
Provisions) Act, 2023, amended the Indian Post The regulations also specify penalties if the
Office Act, 1898 to remove all offences and performance is below a certain level.
penalties.64 The Bill does not provide for any
offences or consequences, except one. Amounts In the consultation paper, TRAI has proposed draft
not paid or neglected by a user will be recoverable regulations to replace the three existing regulations. It
as arrears of land revenue. observed that a single regulation will reduce
compliance requirements and eliminate duplication
For a PRS summary of the Bill, see here. across regulations.
In addition to the draft regulations, TRAI has sought
The Telegraph Right of Way (Amendment)
views specifically on the quality-of-service parameters
Rules, 2023 notified
and measurement methodology for: (i) 4G and 5G
The Indian Telegraph Right of Way (Amendment) networks, (ii) low latency and machine communication,
Rules, 2023 were notified and they amend the Indian and (iii) long-distance networks.
Telegraph Right of Way Rules, 2016.65 The 2016
Comments are invited until September 20, 2023.
Rules provide a framework for the laying of telecom
infrastructure, such as cables, antennas, and cells.66
TRAI releases recommendations on
Key changes include:
authorisation for Digital Connectivity
▪ Establishment of temporary infrastructure: Infrastructure Providers
The amended rules allow a licensee to establish
temporary overground infrastructure if the The Telecom Regulatory Authority of India (TRAI) has
underground infrastructure gets damaged. The recommended introducing a new authorisation under
temporary infrastructure may be established for a the Unified License for Digital Connectivity
period of 60 days from the day damage has been Infrastructure Providers (DCIPs).68 The Unified
reported. No compensation or fee will be charged Licence was introduced in 2013 and it allows telecom
by the appropriate authority for temporary companies to offer multiple services under one licence.
infrastructure created under this rule. DCIPs will be allowed to create active and passive
digital infrastructure. Passive digital infrastructure
▪ Installation of small cells: Under the amended
refers to the ductcs, towers, poles, and other
rules, a licensee may submit a single application
infrastructure which does not involve the transmission
for setting up small cells over multiple sites with
of information. Active infrastructure includes the
the appropriate authority. A small cell refers to a
electronics, radios, antennas, and other communication
low power radio access node that can provide
infrastructure. Currently, under the Infrastructure
cellular services up to two kilometres. Previously,
Providers Category 1 licence, companies can only
applicants had to make individual applications for
create passive infrastructure. To create active
- 16-
Monthly Policy Review – August 2023 PRS Legislative Research
infrastructure, companies must obtain a Unihefied recommended that the bank guarantee for the
Licence for service provisioning. period after the first two quarter should be five
crore rupees or 20% of the estimated sum payable,
Thus, TRAI recommended that DCIP authorisation
whichever is higher. When the licence fee
should allow the purchase of radio equipment without
becomes zero, a bank guarantee of five crore
the need for spectrum. No license fee or performance
rupees must be submitted and renewed yearly.
bank guarantee should be applicable for this
authorisation. Further, entry fee should be kept at two
lakh rupees and the application processing fee should
be kept at Rs 15,000.
Social Justice
Alaya Purewal (alaya@prsindia.org)
Media and Broadcasting
The Constitution (Scheduled Castes) Order
(Amendment) Bill, 2023 passed
Pratinav Damani (pratinav@prsindia.org)
The Constitution (Scheduled Castes) Order
TRAI releases recommendations on licence fees (Amendment) Bill, 2023, was passed by Parliament.70
and policy matters of DTH services The Bill amends the Constitution (Scheduled Caste)
Order, 1950, with respect to its application to
The Telecom Regulatory Authority of India (TRAI)
Chhattisgarh.71 The Bill includes Mahara and Mahra
released its recommendations on ‘Licence Fees and
communities as synonyms of the Mehra, Mahar, and
Policy Matters of DTH Services’.69 Key
Mehar communities in Chhattisgarh.
recommendations include:
For a PRS summary of the Bill, see here
▪ Introduction of Applicable Gross Revenue:
Currently, DTH operators pay a licence fee as a
Standing Committee report on drug abuse
percentage of their Adjusted Gross Revenue
among youth
(AGR). AGR is calculated by excluding GST
from the Gross Revenue. Gross Revenue is the The Standing Committee on Social Justice and
gross inflow of cash, receivables or other Empowerment (Chair: Ms. Rama Devi) submitted its
consideration arising in the course of ordinary report on ‘Drug Abuse Among Young Persons-
activities of the business. Problems and Solutions’.72 Key recommendations of
the Committee include:
▪ To align the definition of Gross Revenue with the
same for the telecom sector, TRAI recommended ▪ Reduction of budgetary allocation: The
that the concept of Applicable Gross Revenue Committee noted that the National Action Plan for
(ApGR) should be introduced. ApGR should be Drug Demand Reduction (NAPDDR) had a
arrived at after deducting certain forms of income budgetary allocation for 260 crore rupees for both
from the Gross Revenue such as: (i) revenue from 2020-21 and 2021-22. It was reduced to 150 crore
activities under a licence by the Department of rupees for 2020-21 and 200 crore rupees for 2021-
Telecommunications, (ii) reimbursements from the 22 during the revised stage. It also observed that
government and (iii) other income from sources NAPDDR had spent approximately Rs 91 crore in
such as dividend, interest, and rent. AGR should 2021-22 rupees and Rs 98 crore in 2021-22. It
be arrived at by deducting GST from ApGR. suggested that the Department of Social Justice
and Empowerment ensure that the number of
▪ Reduction in licence fees: Currently, DTH
beneficiaries under NAPDDR increase in 20223-
operators pay an annual licence fee at the rate of
24. It suggested the budget allocation for 2023-24
8% of their AGR. In order to align the licence fee
to be spent fully as opposed to being cut down at
with other operators such as Multi System
the revised stage.
Operators, OTT platforms and Internet Protocol
TVs, it has recommended that the licence fee ▪ Drug abuse among youth: The Committee
should be reduced to 3% of the AGR. Moreover, observed that opioids, sedatives, and inhalants are
the licence fee should be brought down to zero in being widely used by 10–17-year-olds with over
the next three years. one crore users in the age group. The worst
affected states and UTs include Andhra Pradesh,
▪ Reduction in bank guarantees: As per the
Assam, Bihar, Delhi, and Punjab. The Committee
current regulations, DTH providers must submit a
also observed that despite a ban on alcohol
bank guarantee of five crore rupees for the first
consumption in some states, approximately 19% of
two quarters. Thereafter, the bank guarantee must
India’s population consumes alcohol. The
be equivalent to two quarters of licence fees and
other non-securitised dues. This is referred to as
the estimated sum payable. TRAI has
recommended a reduction in bank guarantee. It
- 17-
Monthly Policy Review – August 2023 PRS Legislative Research
Committee suggested strict vigilance to control Labour
illegal sale of liquor in states/UTs.
Tanvi Vipra (tanvi@prsindia.org)
▪ Role of NGOs in rehabilitation: The Committee
noted that drug usage is widely prevalent in
Cabinet approves central sector scheme for
Punjab, Haryana, Delhi, Uttar Pradesh, Odisha,
artisans and craftspeople
Chhattisgarh, Madhya Pradesh, and Maharashtra.
However, the amount of money given to NGOs The Cabinet Committee on Economic Affairs approved
operating rehabilitation programmes in these states PM-Vishwakarma, a central sector scheme for artisans
has gone down in 2022-23 compared to previous and craftspeople.74 The Scheme seeks to provide credit
years. It observed that the budget reduction was at a concessional interest rate of 5%, up to one lakh
partly due to the non-functioning of some NGOs. rupees in the first tranche, and up to two lakh rupees in
The Committee suggested the need for a fast-track the second tranche. Additional support such as skill
alternate mechanism to ensure that rehabilitations upgradation, incentives for digital transactions, and
programmes do not suffer in critical states. marketing support will also be provided.
The Scheme has a financial outlay of Rs 13,000 crore
from 2023-24 to 2027-28. It will cover 18 traditional
trades such as carpenters, armourer, blacksmith, potter,
Chemical and Fertilizers mason, barber, doll/toy maker, garland maker, tailor,
and sculptor.
Rutvik Upadhyaya (rutvik@prsindia.org)
Standing Committee submits report on social
Scheme to promote research and
security measures for textile workers
innovation in the Pharma MedTech sector
The Standing Committee on Labour, Textiles and Skill
introduced
Development (Chair: Mr. Bhartruhari Mahtab)
The Department of Pharmaceuticals notified the presented its report on ‘Welfare Schemes and Social
Scheme for Promotion of Research and Innovation in Security Measures for Textile Workers in Organised
Pharma MedTech Sector.73 According to the and Unorganised Sectors’.75 Key observations and
Department, India lags significantly behind US and recommendations of the Committee are:
China in spending on pharma research and
▪ Decline in enrolment for insurance schemes:
development.73 The Department also stated that India’s
Textile workers are provided insurance under three
pharma sector is primarily confined to generic drugs.73
schemes: (i) PM Jeevan Jyoti Bima Yojana, (ii)
The scheme seeks to promote linkages between PM Suraksha Bima Yojana, and (iii) the
industry and academia for research and development in Converged Mahatma Gandhi Bunkar Bima
priority areas. It will have two components: (i) Yojana. The Committee observed that enrolment
strengthening the research infrastructure, and (ii) under some of these schemes has declined in 2022-
promoting research in pharma MedTech sector. 23 (up to May 2023). It noted that this was due to
a change in the payment system, where from April
To strengthen research infrastructure, Centres of
2020 onwards, beneficiaries or the state
Excellence will be established at the seven existing
government would pay the premium. Previously,
National Institutes of Pharmaceutical Education and
it was paid from the Social Security Fund, by the
Research. Rs 700 crore will be spent over five years
central and/or state government. Currently, only
for setting up these centres.
Karnataka, Kerala, and Sikkim pay the premium
The research promotion component of the scheme will under the Jeevan Jyoti Yojana.
have a further three categories. Under the first, nine
▪ The Committee recommended that the Ministry of
established pharma companies may be selected that are
Textiles strengthen monitoring and coordination
willing to undertake research in six priority areas. Such
with state governments for payment of premiums.
research would be conducted in collaboration with
government institutes. The companies will be required ▪ Pension: The Ministry provides a monthly
to train select students/scientists at the institutes. pension of Rs 8,000 to weavers and artisans above
the age of 60. To be eligible, the annual income of
Under the second category, funding will be provided to
these workers must be less than one lakh rupees.
30 research projects in six priority areas which are at a
The Committee noted that the income ceiling for
specified level. Under the third category, funding will
eligibility is low and refers to those earning below
be provided for research projects in six priority areas to
the daily minimum wage. It strongly suggested
help Indian startups and MSMEs to be competitive.
reviewing the ceiling and raising it to a reasonable
amount to increase eligibility. In 2022-23, 80
weavers and 339 handicraft workers were provided
the pension. The Ministry noted that the uptake is
- 18-
Monthly Policy Review – August 2023 PRS Legislative Research
low due to insufficient awareness. like multimodal interchange, and automated fare
collection systems.
For a PRS Summary of the Report, please see here.
▪ The total budget outlay for the scheme is Rs 57,613
Standing Committee submits report on crore, of which Rs 20,000 crore will be provided by the
functioning of the Directorate General of central government. The scheme will run over 10 years
Training and will target cities with over three lakh population.
Cities lacking organised bus services will be prioritised.
The Standing Committee on Labour, Textiles and Skill
Development (Chair: Mr. Bhartruhari Mahtab)
presented its report on ‘Functioning of the Directorate
General of Training (DGT)’.76 The DGT functions Civil Aviation
under the Ministry of Skill Development and
Entrepreneurship, and is responsible for the Priyadarshini Jain (priyadarshini@prsindia.org)
development of vocational training programmes. It
frames overall policies, norms, and standards for Aircraft Security Rules, 2023 notified
vocational training in India. This includes setting the
▪ The Ministry of Civil Aviation notified the Aircraft
curriculum, training modules, and assessment criteria.
Security Rules, 2023 under the Aircraft Act, 1934.78
It currently implements five centrally sponsored
The 2023 Rules replace the Aircraft Security Rules,
schemes. Key observations and recommendations of
2011.79 After the release of the draft Rules in
the Committee are:
November 2022 for public input, the 2023 rules have
▪ Quality of Industrial Training Institutes: been established to outline the implementation of
According to a report by NITI Aayog, Industrial airport security measures80. Key features of the Rules
Training Institutes (ITIs) are underutilised, with are as follows:
subpar training quality, and infrastructure.
▪ Powers of Commissioner transferred to DG:
However, the DGT has observed that the report
Under the 2023 Rules, the Director General of the
contained factual inaccuracies. The Committee
Bureau of Civil Aviation Security (BCAS) will be
recommended the Ministry to rectify the
responsible for (i) developing and maintaining the
inaccuracies, and seriously consider other issues
national civil aviation security programme, (ii)
highlighted in the report. These include
coordinating activities between departments, and
establishing a placement and entrepreneurship cell,
(iii) designating authorities at aerodromes to
and facilitating tie-ups with MSMEs. The
implement security controls and procedures.
Committee also highlighted that DGT does not
Under the 2011 Rules, the Commissioner of the
have data on placement of pass outs from ITIs.
BCAS was responsible for these functions.
▪ Enrolments: The Committee observed that
▪ The Aircraft Act, 1934 was amended in 2020
enrolment in ITIs is quite low due to lack of
which made the BCAS a statutory body and
awareness, poor training quality, and lack of job
opportunities. Enrolment in government ITIs is
specified that the DG would head it. The 2023
Rules specify additional functions for the DG, such
59% and in private ITIs is 40%. The Committee
as arranging for security audits.
suggested that the Ministry fix the issue, and
consider improving graduate employability as a ▪ Use of private security agencies: Private security
solution. It also highlighted low enrolment among
personnel, authorised by the Director General will
northeastern states. be engaged to ensure security. The number and
training standards of the private security personnel
will be determined by the central government.
Urban Affairs ▪ Penalties for certain violations: Under the Rules,
aircraft operators are required to carry out certain
Priyadarshini Jain (priyadarshini@prsindia.org) activities. Failure to undertake them will be
considered an offence. Such activities include: (i)
Cabinet approves PM-eBus Sewa for developing a security programme and (ii)
enhancement of city bus operations commencing aircraft operations with approval
from the DG. Additionally, carrying weapons,
The Union Cabinet approved the PM-eBus Sewa to firearms, ammunition, or explosives to an airport
enhance city bus operations and promote sustainable or aircraft is also an offence. Offences are
mobility.77 The Scheme will promote e-mobility and punishable with imprisonment of up to two years,
support the development of charging infrastructure in or a fine of up to one crore rupees or both. The
cities. It has two segments: (i) segment A will have Rules also specify amounts for compounding
10,000 e-buses on a public-private partnership (PPP) certain offences.
model, and (ii) segment B includes green initiatives
- 19-
Monthly Policy Review – August 2023 PRS Legislative Research
▪ Measures against cyber threats: Entities such as Railways has about 62,068 hectares of vacant land.
aerodrome and aircraft operators, or a ground 60%-70% of vacant land consists of narrow strips along
handling agency will be required to identify critical tracks, which are utilised for various operational needs.
information, and develop security measures to The Committee observed out of 1,216 hectares of land
detect unauthorised access, modification, and use with RLDA only 67 hectares have been used for
of such information, and protect against access. commercial development so far. The Committee
recommended that the Ministry utilise more land for
Standing Committee submits report on issue of commercial development to increase the generation of
fixing of airfares non-tariff revenues. It also recommended narrow strips
of land along tracks may be licensed to railway
The Standing Committee on Transport, Tourism and employees for cultivation under the ‘Grow More Food
Culture (Chair: Mr. V. Vijayasai Reddy) submitted its Scheme.’ The scheme licenses vacant railway land to
report on the ‘Issue of Fixing of Airfares,’ on August railway employees for cultivation.
10, 2023.81 Prior to 1994, airfares were fully regulated
by the central government under the Air Corporation For a PRS Report of the summary, please see here.
Act, 1953. It was deregulated in 1994, and presently
Rules under the Aircraft Act, 1934 oversee airfares.
Key observations and recommendations include:
Road and Transport
▪ Current framework for fixing airfares: Under
the Aircraft Rules, 1937, airlines are required to fix Priyadarshini Jain (priyadarshini@prsindia.org)
tariffs while keeping in mind reasonable profits
and the generally prevailing tariff. The Directorate CAG releases report on implementation of
General of Civil Aviation (DGCA) is responsible Phase I of Bharatmala Pariyojana
for monitoring fares. It can issue directions to
The Comptroller and Auditor General of India (CAG)
airlines which charge excessive or predatory
released its audit report on the ‘Implementation of
prices, or engage in oligopolistic practices. The
Phase-I of Bharatmala Pariyojana’.83 The Cabinet
airlines must comply with these directions.
Committee on Economic Affairs (CCEA) approved
▪ The Committee noted that despite the oversight by Bharatmala Pariyojana in October 2017 for the
DGCA, airlines charge excess, which leads to a development of National Highways (NH). Phase I of
surge in airfares. The Committee recommended the program aimed to develop economic corridors,
that the Ministry of Civil Aviation empower feeder roads, and expressways.
DGCA to regulate air tariffs. It also recommended
Implementing agencies of the program include: (i) the
constituting a monitoring body, like SEBI with
National Highways Authority of India (NHAI), (ii) the
quasi-judicial powers to enforce reasonable tariffs.
National Highways and Infrastructure Development
▪ Definition of reasonable profit: The Committee Corporation Limited (NHIDCL), and (iii) the State
observed that reasonable profit is not defined Public Works Department. The scope of the audit
anywhere, leading to arbitrary actions. Further, included the review of planning, financial management,
airlines fix prices on a cost-recovery model and do implementation, and monitoring of Bharatmala. Key
not consider reasonable profits. The Committee observations and recommendations of CAG are:
noted that reasonable profit must be clearly
▪ Existing highways included under Bharatmala:
defined, and airlines must be encouraged to fix
Under Bharatmala Phase I, NHAI is required to
tariffs on this basis.
develop NHs of 70,050 km. However, CAG
For a PRS Report of the summary, please see here. observed that 49% of this (34,972 km) was already
developed or awarded under various highway
schemes before Bharatmala was approved. These
schemes did not have proposals to develop them
Railways
further. CAG recommended that such NHs be
removed from the target length under Bharatmala.
Priyadarshini Jain (priyadarshini@prsindia.org)
▪ Projects taken without fixing previous issues:
Standing Committee submits report on Rail CAG noted that existing incomplete projects under
Land Development Authority the National Highway Development Project were
taken up under Bharatmala without resolving
The Standing Committee on Railways (Chair: Mr. existing bottlenecks. For instance, the highway
Radha Mohan Singh) submitted its report on along the Bihar and Jharkhand border was to be
‘Performance of Rail Land Development Authority’ on completed by November 2021, but as of March
August 8, 2023.82 Established in 2006, the Rail Land 2023, only 62% of the project was completed.
Development Authority (RLDA) develops and Reasons for the delay include unavailability of the
commercialises vacant or under-utilised railway land. right of way and pending land disputes over forest
- 20-
Monthly Policy Review – August 2023 PRS Legislative Research
land. CAG suggested that existing bottlenecks competitive bidding.85 These have been issued under
must be resolved before any remaining projects are the Electricity Act, 2003.86 Hybrid power projects
awarded under Bharatmala. combine different renewable energy sources to reduce
variability in output. Key features include:
For a PRS Report Summary, please see here.
▪ Eligibility: To be eligible for competitive bidding,
Standing Committee submits report on Road the rated power capacity of one resource (wind or
over Bridges and Road under Bridges solar) must be at least 33% of the total capacity of
the hybrid power project. The minimum size of a
The Standing Committee on Transport, Tourism and bid must be: (i) 10 megawatts (MW) for projects
Culture (Chair: Mr. V. Vijayasai Reddy) submitted its connected to intra-state transmission system, and
report on ‘Construction of Road over Bridges, Road (ii) 50 MW for projects connected to inter-state
under Bridges, Service Roads and Review of Road transmission system. The solar and wind
Survey Guidelines.’84 Road Over Bridge (ROB) and components of the project may be at different
Road Under Bridge (RUB) are structures that separate locations. The project may have storage capacity.
road and rail traffic. ROB elevates the road over Entities eligible to procure power from these
railway tracks, while RUB allows the road to pass projects include power distribution companies.
beneath the tracks. Key observations and Power procured through this process may be used
recommendations of the Committee include: to fulfil the renewable purchase obligation.
▪ Construction of ROBs and RUBs: Level ▪ Terms of bidding: A maximum of 50% of the
crossings (LC) are intersections between railway total capacity specified in the bidding document
tracks and roads, posing risks of collisions between can be allocated to a single bidder. Capacity will
vehicles and trains. Since its launch in 2016, the be filled from two or more bidders in the ascending
Setu Bharatam program, aimed at building order of the tariff bid.
ROBs/RUBs, has achieved only 25% completion.
The Committee also noted that the replacement of ▪ Power Purchase Agreement (PPA): The
1,100 LCs in 2023-24, is lower than the yearly procurer must issue a draft PPA in the standard
average of the past decade. It recommended that bidding documents. The term of the PPA will
the replacement target and pace of LCs with generally be for 20-25 years. The draft PPA must
ROBs/RUBs must be increased. It also include: (i) adequate payment security and (ii)
recommended the Ministry to allocate more funds penalty for the procurer in case of failure to off-
and assess the feasibility of a public-private take power scheduled by the generation company.
partnership model for ROBs/RUBs.
▪ Generators will be required to compensate
▪ Delay in construction: The Ministry of Railways procurers in case there is a shortfall in supply as
cited construction delays for ROBs/RUBs due to: compared to what was agreed upon in the PPA. In
(i) environmental clearances, (ii) land acquisition, case of excess generation, the hybrid generating
and (iii) delay in submission of proposal drawings. company may sell the surplus energy to any entity.
The Ministry of Environment, Forest, and Climate However, the procurer has the right of first refusal.
Change has streamlined the process for forest
North-Eastern Region
clearances by allowing online submissions of
drawings and holding fortnightly regional Priyadarshini Jain (priyadarshini@prsindia.org)
coordination meetings. The Committee
recommended that the Ministry of Railways and Cabinet approves the extension of development
the Ministry of Road Transport and Highway
schemes for north-eastern region
should regularly coordinate with the Environment
Ministry to expedite the process. The Union Cabinet approved the extension of two
schemes: (i) the North East Special Infrastructure
For a PRS Report of the summary, please see here.
Development Scheme (NESIDS), and (ii) the North
Eastern Council Scheme (NECS).87 The guidelines of
these two schemes have also been revised.
Power ▪ NESIDS: This scheme aims to facilitate
infrastructure development and connectivity in all
Pratinav Damani (pratinav@prsindia.org) northeastern states. It has been extended till 2025-
26 with a total outlay of Rs 8,140 crore.87 The
Guidelines on power procurement from wind- extended scheme will be restructured into two
solar hybrid projects through competitive components: (i) NESIDS-Roads, focusing on road,
bidding released rail, and water connectivity to tourism and
economic hubs, and (ii) NESIDS-Other than Road
The Ministry of Power issued guidelines on power
Infrastructure, covering projects related to water
procurement from wind-solar hybrid projects through
bodies, solid waste management, and power.88,89
- 21-
Monthly Policy Review – August 2023 PRS Legislative Research
▪ NECS: NECS aims to fill gaps in the overall For a PRS summary of the report, see here.
development of the north-eastern region. This
scheme covers focus areas such as higher Standing Committee submits report
education, organic farming, health, and regional development of trade in north eastern region
tourism. It has been extended till 2026 with a total
outlay of Rs 3,200 crore.87,90 The Standing Committee on Commerce (Chair: Dr.
Abhishek Manu Singhvi) submitted its report on
▪ Oversight of schemes: The Empowered Inter- ‘Development of Trade and Industries in North Eastern
Ministerial Committee at the central level will Region (NER)’.92 Key observations and
continue to monitor and evaluate projects under recommendations of the Committee include:
both schemes. The State-level Empowered
Committee will monitor projects under the ▪ Connectivity: The NER has suffered from poor
NESIDS- Other than Road Infrastructure and NEC inter-state and intra-state transport connectivity.
at the state level.88,89,90 This has impeded everyday life and industrial
development in the region. In order to improve
connectivity, the Committee recommended: (i)
constructing new state highways and minor/district
Commerce roads, (ii) widening the road network in border
areas, (iii) increasing the frequency of freight
Tushar Chakrabarty (tushar@prsindia.org) trains, (iv) creating air cargo handling and cold
storage facilities at airports, and (v) completing
Standing Committee submits report on feasibility studies of national waterways.
ecosystem of startups
▪ Land for industrial use: In most north eastern
The Standing Committee on Commerce (Chair: Dr. states, land cannot be transferred to non-tribals.
Abhishek Manu Singhvi) submitted its report on There is also no database of land for industrial use.
‘Ecosystem of Startups to Benefit India’.91 Key The Committee suggested the creation of a GIS-
recommendations of the Committee include: linked industrial land bank. This can have features
such as plot-level information of available
▪ Access to funding: Investments in startups are
industrial land and provisions for land
cyclical in nature. They witness market
reclassification. The Committee also suggested
corrections based on various factors such as
provisions for leasehold rights to be made
macroeconomic conditions, investor sentiments,
transferable and mortgageable.
and monetary policies. The Committee observed
that there was a need to create a pool of additional ▪ Trade with ASEAN: The geographical advantage
funds to help good startups in such periods. It of NER states needs to be utilised to strategically
recommended that the Department for Promotion increase India’s trade with Association of
of Industry and Internal Trade (DPIIT) should Southeast Asian Nations (ASEAN). For
conduct an assessment to identify areas that require strengthening export linkages with ASEAN, the
additional funding. The Committee also expressed Committee recommended: (i) starting direct flights
concerns at the lack of government-supported to ASEAN countries under the UDAN
mechanisms to monitor funds received by startups (International) Scheme, (ii) setting up more land
from private investors. Startups may be custom stations, and (iii) opening consulate offices
encouraged to adopt best accounting practices. of ASEAN countries in the NER. The government
must identify and promote such industries in the
▪ Single implementation agency: Forty-two
NER which could cater to markets in ASEAN and
ministries/departments/bodies are overseeing the
other neighbouring countries.
implementation of various schemes and initiatives
related to startups. The Committee noted that this For a PRS summary of the report, see here.
leads to lack of coordination and delay in scheme
implementation. It recommended the creation of a
single implementing body to oversee and manage
Consumer Affairs
the entire startup ecosystem. It also recommended
creating a grievance redressal mechanism to
Tanvi Vipra (tanvi@prsindia.org)
address issues in real-time and provide solutions.
▪ Regulatory support: The Committee noted that Standing Committee submits report on the
easing regulatory/legal framework to facilitate sugar industry
direct overseas listing of unlisted Indian startups
could give a boost to the ecosystem. It also The Standing Committee on Consumer Affairs, Food
recommended simplifying the registration process and Public Distribution (Chair: Ms. Locket Chatterjee)
for startups and eliminating the extensive list of presented its report on ‘Sugar Industry in India – A
eligibility criteria for registration with DPIIT. Review’.93 In sugar season (October-September) 2021-
22, India was the largest producer and consumer of
- 22-
Monthly Policy Review – August 2023 PRS Legislative Research
sugar, and the second largest exporter of the Scheme was operational from April 2020 till
commodity. Key observations and recommendations December 2022. It had a financial outlay of about
of the Committee are: four lakh crore rupees, of which 87% was actually
spent (Rs 3.4 lakh crore). During the Scheme
▪ Cyclicity on decline: The sugar industry faces
period, 1,015 lakh metric tonnes of food grains
cyclicity due to the price incentives given by the
were distributed, 91% of the total grains allocated.
government for cultivation of sugarcane. This
The Committee noted that the PMGKAY’s
affects the market prices of sugar. The Committee
performance was outstanding.
observed that cyclicity in the industry has declined
since 2010-11 and has been almost eliminated ▪ Monitoring and evaluation: The Committee
during the last five years. It noted this was due to noted that the Department of Food and Public
continuous increase in the area under production, Distribution has engaged 13 monitoring
and consequent growth in sugar production. institutions to evaluate the implementation of
NFSA between 2020-2023. As per reports
▪ As per the Committee, policy interventions such as
submitted for the first two years, most surveyed
the ethanol blending petrol, state advised price and
households in all states and UTs received their full
fair and remunerative price of sugarcane, and
entitlement under PMGKAY.
cogeneration of power have led to improving the
overall health of the sector. ▪ Inclusion of coarse grains: The Committee
observed that coarse grains have high nutrition and
▪ Payment arrears to farmers: During sugar
non-acid forming properties. About 5.8 lakh
season 2022-23, mills have procured sugarcane
metric tonnes of coarse grains such as ragi and
worth Rs 1.13 lakh crore, and have released 92%
bajra were distributed to beneficiaries in six states
of the payment (as on June 30, 2023). For sugar
under PMGKAY.
season 2021-22, payment arrears to farmers have
been reduced to Rs 115 crore. Additionally, high
Standing Committee submits report on the
ex-mill prices of sugar in the domestic market
production and distribution of coarse grains
indicate that mills are able to reasonably realise
their sales. In 2021-22, during the ethanol supply The Standing Committee on Consumer Affairs, Food
year (December-November), sugar mills earned Rs and Public Distribution (Chair: Ms. Locket Chatterjee)
20,000 crore from the sale of ethanol to oil presented its report on ‘Coarse Grains Production and
marketing companies. This also assisted in Distribution’.95 Coarse grains include barley, millet,
clearing dues of farmers. and maize. Key observations and recommendations of
the Committee are:
▪ Ethanol blending programme: The National
Biofuel Policy, 2018 allows ethanol to be produced ▪ Production: Coarse grain production increased by
from sugarcane juice, and be blended in petrol. 96.7 lakh metric tonne between 2018-19 and 2022-
The 2022-23 ethanol supply year (December- 23. Between 2017-18 and 2021-22, the average
November) requires 550-600 crore litres of ethanol production for six coarse grains was 480 lakh
to meet the 12% blending target. The current metric tonnes. Maize accounted for 63% of this
production capacity is 1,070 crore litres, of which production. The Committee noted that the
723 crore litres comes from molasses. The government has: (i) undertaken awareness
Committee observed that to achieve the 20% campaigns on health benefits of coarse grains, (ii)
blending target by 2025, 1,350 crore litres of constituted six task forces, and (iii) engaged with
ethanol will be required. farmer producer organisations to promote millets.
▪ Procurement for welfare schemes: The
Standing Committee submits report on
Committee observed a substantial increase in the
Pradhan Mantri Garib Kalyan Yojana
procurement of coarse grains for welfare schemes
The Standing Committee on Consumer Affairs, Food from 2017-18 onwards. States are allowed to
and Public Distribution (Chair: Ms. Locket Chatterjee) procure coarse grains under the decentralised
presented its report on ‘Pradhan Mantri Garib Kalyan procurement mode from farmers at the minimum
Anna Yojana (PMGKAY)’.94 Under the Scheme, support price (MSP). These are to be distributed
eligible beneficiaries were provided five kg of food under the targeted public distribution scheme
grains per person per month, free of cost. This was (TDPS) and other welfare schemes such as the
above their entitlements under the National Food integrated child development scheme (ICDS) and
Security Act (NFSA), 2013. PMGKAY initially was PM-POSHAN (previously midday meal).
operational until December 2022. After that,
▪ The offtake of coarse grains was limited to
distribution under the NFSA was renamed as
Haryana and Maharashtra, but has extended to
PMGKAY and foodgrains will be given free of cost
seven additional states. The Committee noted that
until December 2024. Key observations of the
remaining states should also procure coarse grains
Committee are:
for distribution under these schemes. The
▪ Financial and physical performance: The Committee noted that revisions in guidelines in
- 23-
Monthly Policy Review – August 2023 PRS Legislative Research
2021-22 to: (i) increase distribution periods from For a PRS Summary of the Report, please see here.
three months to 6-10 months, and (ii) provide for
inter-state transport of surplus millet through FCI,
played a role in the rise in the number of states
opting for millet procurement. Women and Child Development
▪ Promotion of production: MSP for coarse grains Alaya Purewal (alaya@prsindia.org)
increased from Rs 2,879 per quintal in 2018-19 to
Rs 3,578 per quintal in 2022-23. The Committee Standing Committee report on the functioning
noted that this played a key role in attracting
of the National Commission of Women
farmers to cultivate these grains. The Committee
also noted that the Ministry of Agriculture and The Standing Committee on the Empowerment of
Farmers’ Welfare is assisting rural farmers to Women (Chair: Dr. Heena Vijaykumar Gavit)
purchase primary processing equipment. submitted its report on “Working of National
Commission for Women and State Commission for
Women”.96 The National Commission for Women
(NCW) is mandated to facilitate grievances of women
Agriculture and recommend women specific legislative and policy
measures. Key observations and recommendations of
Tanvi Vipra (tanvi@prsindia.org) the Committee include:
▪ The National Commission for Women Act,
Standing Committee submits report on
1990: The Committee noted that there is an urgent
development of horticulture
need to review the National Commission for
The Standing Committee on Agriculture and Farmers Women Act, 1990 to make the NCW more
Welfare (Chair: Mr. P.C. Gaddigoudar) presented its independent, and effective. It recommended
report on ‘Mission for Integrated Development of empowering the NCW with a certain degree of
Horticulture – An Appraisal’. Horticulture is a branch accountability over the police to implement their
of agriculture that deals with fruits and vegetables. directions and penalise non-compliance. It also
Key observations and recommendations of the recommended the NCW to propose amendments in
Committee include: the 1990 Act and submit them to the Ministry of
Women and Child Development (MWCD).
▪ Mission for Integrated Development of
Horticulture (MIDH): MIDH has five sub- ▪ State Commissions for Women: The Committee
schemes, which were earlier separate schemes. noted that many established State Commissions for
These are: (i) National Horticulture Mission, (ii) Women are not fully functional due to non-
Horticulture Mission for North East and appointment of Chairpersons or lack of allocation
Himalayan States, (iii) the National Horticulture of funds. It observed that many states including
Board, (iv) the Coconut Development Board, and Bihar and Madhya Pradesh do not have their own
(v) the Central Institute of Horticulture. The first State Commission for Women. The Committee
two sub-schemes are implemented as centrally observed that functional State Commissions for
sponsored schemes, while the other three are Women will help the NCW in disposing of
implemented as central sector schemes. The complaints emanating from their respective states.
Committee recommended that all sub-schemes It recommended establishing a statutory linkage
under the MIDH be implemented as centrally with State Commissions for Women to ensure
sponsored schemes. smoother coordination. It also recommended the
MWCD to urge states to strengthen their
▪ National policy for horticulture: India is the
Commissions by filling up vacancies and
second largest producer of fruits and vegetables,
allocating adequate funds.
after China. The Committee noted that horticulture
can enhance food security with food substitutes ▪ Implementation of recommendations: The
like potatoes. However, it observed that there is no Committee noted that the NCW has reviewed and
independent national policy for horticulture. It suggested amendments for about 161 laws. These
recommended that a National Policy be evolved amendments include laws related to: (i) child
for holistic promotion and development of marriage, (ii) domestic violence, (iii) women’s
horticulture. It also recommended that setting up safety, and (iv) the medical termination of
of horticulture cluster development programmes pregnancy. However, the Committee noted that
and centres of excellence be expedited to increase there is no time frame followed for the
productivity. The Committee also noted that about implementation of NCW’s recommendation. It
12,000 hectares of cultivable waste land is recommended the establishment of a mechanism
available which can be utilised for horticulture. It within the MWCD, Ministry of Law and Justice,
recommended that such land be reclaimed to and other concerned ministries to adhere to a fixed
promote horticulture crops under MIDH. time frame and ensure the implementation of
- 24-
Monthly Policy Review – August 2023 PRS Legislative Research
recommendations made by the NCW.
For a PRS summary of the Report, see here.
Personnel
Alaya Purewal (alaya@prsindia.org)
Tourism
Standing Committee submitted report on the
Arpita Mallick (arpita@prsindia.org) functioning of recruitment organisation
The Standing Committee on Personnel, Public
CAG Report on Swadesh Darshan Scheme
Grievances, Law and Justice (Chair: Mr. Sushil Kumar
submitted
Modi) submitted its report on ‘Review of Functioning
The Comptroller and Auditor General of India of Recruitment Organisations of Government of India’,
submitted its performance audit report on ‘Swadesh on August 3, 2023.98 The Committee examined the
Darshan Scheme’, on August 9, 2023.97 The Ministry present working procedure followed by various
of Tourism launched the Swadesh Darshan Scheme in recruitment organisations including the: (i) Union
January 2015. Its objective was to develop tourism Public Services Commission (UPSC), (ii) Staff
infrastructure in the country. The Ministry sanctioned Selection Committee (SSC), (iii) National Recruitment
76 projects across 15 tourist circuits worth Rs 5,456 Agency (NRA), (iv) Central Armed Police Forces
crore. These include: (i) the Himalayan circuit, (ii) the (CAPFs), and (v) Institute of Banking Personnel
North East circuit and (iii) the Coastal circuit. Selection (IBPS). Key observations and
recommendations of the Committee include:
The report gives an overview of the performance of the
scheme from 2015 to 2022. A sample of 14 projects ▪ Timeline of recruitment exam: The Committee
from 13 states covering 10 tourist circuits were selected observed that each recruitment exam conducted by
for examination. UPSC takes anywhere between six months to a
year to complete. It noted that the entire process
The report noted that the scheme was formulated
should not be more than six months. It
without conducting any feasibility study. This resulted
recommended that the SSC should implement
in poor identification of sites and deficiencies in
computer-based examination wherever possible to
execution, such as delays and non-utilisation of funds.
reduce the timeline of the examination cycle.
Moreover, the Ministry did not prepare a National or
State level plan before launching the scheme. Detailed ▪ Functioning of NRA: The Committee observed
Perspective Plans form the basis of selection of projects that the NRA, which has been tasked with
for which Detailed Project Reports (DPR) are made. conducting examinations for ‘Group B’ and
Post-launch, DPPs were not prepared for 14 out of 15 ‘Group C’ employees, is not yet functional. It
circuits. The scheme overlapped with various other recommended that the NRA consult with the SSC
schemes in its scope. The Standing Committee on and the Railway Recruitment Board regarding the
Finance had recommended that the Ministry form an recruitment proposal being prepared. Further, the
umbrella scheme by merging schemes with overlapping NRA may begin with graduate level examinations
objectives. It has been recommended that the Ministry: to reduce the number of eligible candidates.
(i) review current schemes to ensure that there is no
For a PRS summary of the Report, see here.
overlap in the objectives, (ii) formulate long term
development plans in sync with DPPs, and (iii)
prescribe a timeline for feedback on proposals to ensure
timely approvals.
For a PRS summary of the Report, see here.
1 Special Session of Parliament, @JoshiPralhad, Minister of https://rbidocs.rbi.org.in/rdocs/PressRelease/PDFs/PR723MPCBDE7
Parliamentary Affairs, X, August 31, 2023, 7DBC84204BAC85422FA0E28988A1.PDF.
https://twitter.com/JoshiPralhad/status/1697184544489910439. 5 The Government of National Capital Territory of Delhi
2 Press Note on Estimates of Gross Domestic Product for the First (Amendment) Bill, 2023,
Quarter (April-June) 2023-24, Ministry of Statistics and Programme https://egazette.gov.in/WriteReadData/2023/248046.pdf.
Implementation, August 31, 2023, 6 The Government of National Capital Territory of Delhi Act, 1991,
https://www.mospi.gov.in/sites/default/files/press_release/PressNote https://www.indiacode.nic.in/bitstream/123456789/1923/1/A1992-
Q1_FY24.pdf. 01.pdf.
3 “Quick Estimates of Index of Industrial Production and Use-Based 7 The Government of National Capital Territory of Delhi
Index for the Month of June 2023”, Press Information Bureau, (Amendment) Ordinance, 2023,
Ministry of Statistics and Programme Implementation, August 11, https://egazette.gov.in/WriteReadData/2023/245962.pdf.
2023, https://pib.gov.in/PressReleasePage.aspx?PRID=1947790.
8 The Registration of Births and Deaths Bill, 2023,
4 Resolution of the Monetary Policy Committee (MPC), Monetary https://egazette.gov.in/WriteReadData/2023/248046.pdf.
Policy Statement, 2023-24, August 10, 2023,
- 25-
Monthly Policy Review – August 2023 PRS Legislative Research
27 The Integrated Goods and Services Tax Act, 2017,
https://www.indiacode.nic.in/bitstream/123456789/2251/1/A2017-
9 The Registration of Births and Deaths Act, 1960,
13.pdf.
https://www.indiacode.nic.in/bitstream/123456789/11674/1/the_regis
tration_of_births_and_deaths_act%2C_1969.pdf. 28 Consultation paper on review of framework for borrowings by
Large Corporates, Securities and Exchange Board of India, August
10 The Bharatiya Nyaya Sanhita, 2023,
10, 2023, https://www.sebi.gov.in/reports-and-statistics/reports/aug-
https://prsindia.org/files/bills_acts/bills_parliament/2023/Bharatiya_
2023/consultation-paper-on-review-of-framework-for-borrowings-
Nyaya_Sanhita,_2023.pdf.
by-large-corporates_75179.html.
11 Lok Sabha Synopsis of Debates, August 11, 2023,
29 Reset of Floating Interest Rate on Equated Monthly Instalments
https://sansad.in/getFile/Synop/17/XII/SYN_11082023_ENG.pdf?so
(EMI) based Personal Loans, Reserve Bank of India, August 18,
urce=loksabhadocs.
2023,
12 The Bharatiya Nagarik Suraksha Sanhita, 2023, Lok Sabha, August https://rbidocs.rbi.org.in/rdocs/notification/PDFs/EMILOANCIRCU
11, 2023, LARBC3C67A8D4554B35BEDF51A6C10DF92C.PDF.
https://sansad.in/getFile/BillsTexts/LSBillTexts/Asintroduced/122_2
30 Fair Lending Practices – Penal Charges in Loan Accounts, Reserve
023_LS_ENG811202312939PM.pdf?source=legislation.
Bank of India, August 18, 2023,
13 The Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973, https://rbidocs.rbi.org.in/rdocs/notification/PDFs/FAIRLENDINGPR
https://www.indiacode.nic.in/bitstream/123456789/16225/1/a1974- ACTICE1B9DBE75410B4DA881E6EF953304B6F7.PDF.
02.pdf.
31 Consultation Paper on Review of Voluntary Delisting norms under
14 Synopsis of Debates, Lok Sabha, August 11, 2023, SEBI (Delisting of Equity Shares) Regulations, 2021, Securities and
https://sansad.in/getFile/Synop/17/XII/SYN_11082023_ENG.pdf?so Exchange Board of India, August 14, 2023,
urce=loksabhadocs. https://www.sebi.gov.in/reports-and-statistics/reports/aug-
15 Bhartiya Sakshya Bill, 2023, Ministry of Home Affairs, August 11, 2023/consultation-paper-on-review-of-voluntary-delisting-norms-
2023, under-sebi-delisting-of-equity-shares-regulations-2021_75335.html.
https://sansad.in/getFile/BillsTexts/LSBillTexts/Asintroduced/123_2 32 Securities and Exchange Board of India (Listing Obligations and
023_LS_ENG811202320706PM.pdf?source=legislation. Disclosure Requirements) (Third Amendment) Regulations, 2023,
16 Digital Personal Data Protection Bill, 2023, Ministry of Electronics Securities and Exchange Board of India, August 23, 2023,
and Information Technology, August 11, 2023, https://www.sebi.gov.in/legal/regulations/aug-2023/securities-and-
https://sansad.in/getFile/BillsTexts/LSBillTexts/PassedBothHouses/d exchange-board-of-india-listing-obligations-and-disclosure-
ata%20protection818202332045PM.pdf?source=legislation. requirements-third-amendment-regulations-2023_75861.html.
17 Report No. 48, Standing Committee on Communications and 33 Securities and Exchange Board of India (Listing Obligations and
Information Technology: ‘Citizens’ Data Security and Privacy, Disclosure Requirements) Regulations, 2015, Securities and
August 1, 2023, Exchange Board of India,
https://sansad.in/getFile/lsscommittee/Communications%20and%20I https://www.sebi.gov.in/legal/regulations/jul-2023/securities-and-
nformation%20Technology/17_Communications_and_Information_ exchange-board-of-india-listing-obligations-and-disclosure-
Technology_48.pdf?source=loksabhadocs. requirements-regulations-2015-last-amended-on-july-4-2023-
18 The Chief Election Commissioner and Other Election _74143.html.
Commissioners (Appointment, Conditions of Service, and Terms of 34 Consultation Paper on Performance Validation Agency, Securities
Office) Bill, 2023, and Exchange Board of India, August 31, 2023,
https://sansad.in/getFile/BillsTexts/RSBillTexts/Asintroduced/chief% https://www.sebi.gov.in/reports-and-statistics/reports/aug-
20election-E810202351548PM.pdf?source=legislation 2023/consultation-paper-on-performance-validation-
19 The Election Commission (Conditions of Service of Election agency_76220.html.
Commissioners and Transaction of Business) Act, 1991,
20 S.O 3661(E), The Gazette, August 16, 2023, 35 The Mines and Minerals (Development and Regulation)
https://egazette.gov.in/WriteReadData/2023/248113.pdf. Amendment Bill, 2023, Ministry of Coal and Mines, August 9, 2023,
21 Delimitation of Parliamentary and Assembly Constituencies in https://sansad.in/getFile/BillsTexts/LSBillTexts/PassedBothHouses/
Assam, The Election Commission of India, August 11, 2023, mines&mineral8162023122316PM.pdf?source=legislation.
https://eci.gov.in/files/file/15221-delimitation-of-parliamentary-and- 36 The Mines and Minerals (Development and Regulation) Act, 1957,
assembly-constituencies-in-state-of-assam-%E2%80%93-final- December 28, 1957,
notification-%E2%80%93-regarding/. https://www.indiacode.nic.in/bitstream/123456789/1421/1/a1957-
22 “ECI publishes final delimitation order for Assembly and 67.pdf.
Parliamentary Constituencies of State of Assam after extensive 37 The Offshore Areas Mineral (Development and Regulation)
consultations with stakeholders”, Press Information Bureau, Election Amendment Bill, 2023, Ministry of Coal and Mines, August 10,
Commission, August 11, 2023, 2023,
https://pib.gov.in/PressReleaseIframePage.aspx?PRID=1947865#:~:t https://sansad.in/getFile/BillsTexts/LSBillTexts/PassedBothHouses/O
ext=Delimitation%20of%20the%20Assembly%20and,8%20A%20of ffshore818202330726PM.pdf?source=legislation.
%20the%20R.%20P. 38 The Offshore Areas Mineral (Development and Regulation) Act,
23 Report No. 132, Specific Aspects of Election Process and their 2002, January 30, 2002,
Reforms, Standing Committee on Personnel, Public Grievances, and https://www.indiacode.nic.in/bitstream/123456789/2040/1/200317.pd
Law and Justice, August 04, 2023, f.
https://sansad.in/getFile/rsnew/Committee_site/Committee_File/Repo 39 Indian Institutes of Management (Amendment) Bill, 2023, Ministry
rtFile/18/171/132_2023_8_12.pdf?source=rajyasabha. of Education, July 28, 2023,
24 The Central Goods and Services Tax (Amendment) Bill, 2023, Lok https://sansad.in/getFile/BillsTexts/LSBillTexts/PassedBothHouses/II
Sabha, August 11, 2023, M818202332526PM.pdf?source=legislation
https://sansad.in/getFile/BillsTexts/LSBillTexts/PassedLoksabha/CG 40 ‘Shri Dharmendra Pradhan releases National Curriculum
ST_2023816202313120PM.pdf?source=legislation. Framework for School Education in New Delhi’, Ministry of
25 The Integrated Goods and Services Tax (Amendment) Bill, 2023, Education, August 23, 2023,
Lok Sabha, August 11, 2023, https://dsel.education.gov.in/sites/default/files/update/PIB1951485.pd
https://sansad.in/getFile/BillsTexts/LSBillTexts/PassedLoksabha/IGS f.
T_2023816202313153PM.pdf?source=legislation. 41 ‘National Curriculum Framework for School Education (NCF-
26 The Central Goods and Services Tax Act, 2017, SE)’, Ministry of Education,
https://www.indiacode.nic.in/bitstream/123456789/15689/1/A2017- https://dsel.education.gov.in/sites/default/files/NCF2023.pdf.
12.pdf.
- 26-
Monthly Policy Review – August 2023 PRS Legislative Research
61Report No. 47, Standing Committee on Communications and
Information Technology: ‘Review of Functioning of Central Board of
42 National Curriculum Framework (2005), National Council of
Film Certification’, August 1, 2023,
Education Research and Training, https://ncert.nic.in/pdf/nc-
https://sansad.in/getFile/lsscommittee/Communications%20and%20I
framework/nf2005-english.pdf.
nformation%20Technology/17_Communications_and_Information_
43 National Education Policy, 2020, Ministry of Education, Technology_47.pdf?source=loksabhadocs.
https://www.education.gov.in/sites/upload_files/mhrd/files/NEP_Fina
62 The Post Office Bill, 2023, Ministry of Communications and
l_English_0.pdf.
Information Technology, August 10, 2023,
44 The National Dental Commission Bill, 2023, Ministry of Health https://sansad.in/getFile/BillsTexts/RSBillTexts/Asintroduced/post%
and Family Welfare (MoHFW), August 11, 2023, 20office-E810202331641PM.pdf?source=legislation.
https://sansad.in/getFile/BillsTexts/LSBillTexts/PassedBothHouses/d
63 The Indian Post Office Act, 1898, March 22, 1898,
ental%20commission818202331751PM.pdf?source=legislation.
https://www.indiacode.nic.in/bitstream/123456789/2329/1/A1898-
45 The National Nursing and Midwifery Commission Bill, 2023, 06.pdf.
Ministry of Health and Family Welfare, August 8, 2023
64 The Jan Vishwas (Amendment of Provisions) Act, 2023, Ministry
https://sansad.in/getFile/BillsTexts/LSBillTexts/PassedBothHouses/N of Commerce and Industry, August 11, 2023,
ursing%20and%20midwifery818202342732PM.pdf?source=legislati https://sansad.in/getFile/BillsTexts/LSBillTexts/PassedBothHouses/J
on. an%20vishwas818202331041PM.pdf?source=legislation.
46 The Indian Nursing Council Act, 1947, December 31, 1947 65 The Indian Telegraph Right of Way (Amendment) Rules, 2023,
https://www.indiannursingcouncil.org/uploads/files/16141575032256 Ministry of Communications, August 7, 2023,
.pdf https://dot.gov.in/sites/default/files/Gazette%20Notification%20IT%
47 ‘Performance Audit of Ayushman Bharat – Pradhan Mantri Jan 20RoW%20Amendment%20Rules%20-
Aarogya Yojana’, Comptroller Auditor General of India (CAG), %2008082023.pdf?download=1.
August 08, 2023, 66 The Indian Telegraph Right of Way Rules, 2016, Ministry of
https://cag.gov.in/uploads/download_audit_report/2023/Report-No.- Communications, November 15, 2016,
11-of-2023_PA-on-PMJAY_English-PDF-A- https://egazette.gov.in/WriteReadData/2016/172637.pdf
064d22bab2b83b5.38721048.pdf . 67 Consultation Paper on Review of Quality-of-Service Standards for
Access Services (Wireless and Wireline) and
48 Pharmacy (Amendment) Act, 2023, Ministry of Health and Family Broadband Services (Wireless and Wireline), Telecom Regulatory
Welfare, August 15, 2023, Authority of India, August 18, 2023,
https://sansad.in/getFile/BillsTexts/LSBillTexts/PassedBothHouses/P https://www.trai.gov.in/sites/default/files/CP_18082023.pdf.
harmacy823202325258PM.pdf?source=legislation. 68 Recommendations on ‘Introduction of Digital Connectivity
49 Mental Health Care and its Management in Contemporary Times, Infrastructure Provider (DCIP) Authorization Under Unified License
August 4, 2023, Standing Committee on Health and Family Welfare, (UL)’, Telecom Reguatory Authority of India, August 8, 2023,
https://sansad.in/getFile/rsnew/Committee_site/Committee_File/Repo https://www.trai.gov.in/sites/default/files/Recommendations_080820
rtFile/14/168/148_2023_8_16.pdf?source=rajyasabha/ 23_0.pdf.
50 The Mediation Bill, 2021 69 Recommendations on License Fee and Policy Matters of DTH
51 Report No. 117, Mediation Bill 2021 (Volume I- Report), Standing Services, Telecom Regulatory Authority of India, August 21, 2023,
Committee on Personnel, Public Grievances, and Law and Justice, https://www.trai.gov.in/sites/default/files/Recommendation_2108202
July 13, 2022. 3_0.pdf.
52 The Advocates (Amendment) Bill, 2023, 70 The Constitution (Scheduled Castes) Order (Amendment) Bill,
https://sansad.in/getFile/BillsTexts/RSBillTexts/PassedRajyaSabha/a 2023, https://egazette.gov.in/WriteReadData/2023/248090.pdf.
dvocate%20amend-E842023112014AM.pdf?source=legislation. 71 The Constitution (Scheduled Castes) Order, 1950,
53 The Advocates Act, 1961, https://lddashboard.legislative.gov.in/sites/default/files/13_The%20C
https://www.indiacode.nic.in/bitstream/123456789/1631/1/A1961_25 onstitution%20%28SC%29%20Order%201950.pdf.
.pdf. 72 Report No. 51, Drug abuse among young persons- problems and
54 The Legal Practitioners Act, 1879, solutions, Department of Social Justice and Empowerment, August 3,
https://lddashboard.legislative.gov.in/sites/default/files/A1879- 2023,
18.pdf. https://sansad.in/getFile/lsscommittee/Social%20Justice%20&%20E
55 Report No. 133, Judicial Process and their Reforms, Standing mpowerment/17_Social_Justice_And_Empowerment_51.pdf?source
=loksabhadocs.
Committee on Personnel, Public Grievances, and Law and Justice,
August 7, 2023, 73 ‘Scheme for Promotion of Research and Innovation in Pharma
https://www.google.com/url?q=https://sansad.in/getFile/rsnew/Comm MedTech Sector (PRIP)’, Department of Pharmaceuticals, Ministry
ittee_site/Committee_File/ReportFile/18/171/133_2023_8_10.pdf?so of Chemicals and Fertilizers, August 16, 2023,
urce%3Drajyasabha&source=gmail&ust=1693330823043000&usg= https://pharmaceuticals.gov.in/sites/default/files/Gazette%20Notificat
AOvVaw3ULP5pnbbo8iSseMSYFImJ. ion%20PRIP%20-%20Dated%2017%20Aug%2023.pdf.
56 The Multi-State Co-operative Societies (Amendment) Bill, 2022, 74 “Union Cabinet approves new Central Sector Scheme ‘PM
https://sansad.in/getFile/BillsTexts/LSBillTexts/PassedLoksabha/215 Vishwakarma’ to support traditional artisans and craftspeople of rural
-C_2022_LS_Eng7262023110825AM.pdf?source=legislation. and urban India”, Press Information Bureau, Cabinet Committee on
57 The Multi-State Co-operative Societies Act, 2002, Economic Affairs, August 16, 2023,
https://www.pib.gov.in/PressReleasePage.aspx?PRID=1949410.
https://mscs.dac.gov.in/Guidelines/GuidelineAct2002.pdf.
58 The Inter-Services Organisations (Command, Control and 75 Report No. 50, ‘Welfare Schemes and Social Security Measures for
Textile Workers in Organised and Unorganised Sectors’, Standing
Discipline Bill), 2023, Rajya Sabha,
Committee on Labour Textiles and Skill Development, Lok Sabha,
https://sansad.in/getFile/BillsTexts/LSBillTexts/PassedBothHouses/I
August 4, 2023,
nter-Services823202325458PM.pdf?source=legislation.
https://sansad.in/getFile/lsscommittee/Labour,%20Textiles%20and%
59 The Press and Registration of Periodicals Bill, 2023, Ministry of
20Skill%20Development/17_Labour_Textiles_and_Skill_Developme
Information and Broadcasting, August 3, 2023,
nt_50.pdf?source=loksabhadocs.
https://sansad.in/getFile/BillsTexts/RSBillTexts/PassedRajyaSabha/P
76 Report No. 50, ‘Functioning of the Directorate General of
ress%20&%20registration-
Training’, Standing Committee on Labour Textiles and Skill
E842023111925AM.pdf?source=legislation.
Development, Lok Sabha, August 4, 2023,
60 The Press and Registration of Books Act, 1867, March 22, 1867,
https://sansad.in/getFile/lsscommittee/Labour,%20Textiles%20and%
https://www.indiacode.nic.in/bitstream/123456789/2272/1/A1867__2
5.pdf.
- 27-
Monthly Policy Review – August 2023 PRS Legislative Research
https://mdoner.gov.in/contentimages/files/GUIDELINES-FOR-
NESIDS-(OTRI)-1.pdf
20Skill%20Development/17_Labour_Textiles_and_Skill_Developme
nt_49.pdf?source=loksabhadocs. 90 Guidelines for Administration of Scheme of North eastern Council,
Ministry of Development of North Eastern Region, August 21, 2023,
77 “Cabinet approves PM-eBus Sewa for augmenting city bus
https://mdoner.gov.in/contentimages/files/Guidelines-of-Schemes-of-
operations,” Press Information Bureau, Ministry of Housing & Urban
NEC-dated-21.08.2023-1.pdf
Affairs, August 16, 2023,
https://www.pib.gov.in/PressReleasePage.aspx?PRID=1949430 91 Report No. 182, ‘Ecosystem of Startups to Benefit India’, Standing
Committee on Commerce, Rajya Sabha, August 10, 2023,
78 Aircraft (Security) Rules, 2023, Ministry of Civil Aviation, August
https://sansad.in/getFile/rsnew/Committee_site/Committee_File/Repo
9, 2023, https://egazette.gov.in/WriteReadData/2023/247994.pdf
rtFile/13/174/182_2023_8_12.pdf?source=rajyasabha.
79 Aircraft (Security) Rules, 2011, Ministry of Civil Aviation, January
92 Report No. 181, ‘Development of Trade and Industries in North
19, 2012,
Eastern Region’, India’, Standing Committee on Commerce, Rajya
http://164.100.60.133/security/Aircraft(Security)%20Rules,%202011.
Sabha, August 10, 2023,
pdf.
https://sansad.in/getFile/rsnew/Committee_site/Committee_File/Repo
80 Draft Aircraft (Security) Rules, 2022, Ministry of Civil Aviation, rtFile/13/174/181_2023_8_12.pdf?source=rajyasabha.
November 11, 2022,
93 Report No. 37, ‘Sugar Industry in India – A Review’, Standing
https://egazette.gov.in/WriteReadData/2022/240208.pdf
Committee on Food, Consumer Affairs and Public Distribution, Lok
81 Report No. 353,‘ Issues of Fixing of Airfares’, Standing Committee Sabha, August 9, 2023,
on Transport, Tourism and Culture, Rajya Sabha, August 10, 2023, https://sansad.in/getFile/lsscommittee/Consumer%20Affairs,%20Foo
https://sansad.in/getFile/rsnew/Committee_site/Committee_File/Repo d%20and%20Public%20Distribution/17_Consumer_Affairs_Food_a
rtFile/20/173/353_2023_8_12.pdf?source=rajyasabha nd_Public_Distribution_32.pdf?source=loksabhadocs.
82 Report No. 16,‘ Performance of Rail Land Development 94 Report No. 28, ‘Pradhan Mantri Garib Kalyan Anna Yojana
Authority’, Standing Committee on Railways, Lok (PMGKAY)’, Standing Committee on Food, Consumer Affairs and
Sabha, August 8, 2023, Public Distribution, Lok Sabha, August 3, 2023,
https://sansad.in/getFile/lsscommittee/Railways/17_Railways_16.pdf https://sansad.in/getFile/lsscommittee/Consumer%20Affairs,%20Foo
?source=loksabhadocs d%20and%20Public%20Distribution/17_Consumer_Affairs_Food_a
83 Report No. 19 of 2023 – Implementation of Phase I of Bharatmala nd_Public_Distribution_28.pdf?source=loksabhadocs.
Pariyojana, Union Government (Ministry of Road Transport and 95 Report No. 31, ‘Coarse Grains: Production and Distribution’,
Highway), Comptroller and Auditor General of Standing Committee on Food, Consumer Affairs and Public
India, August 10, 2023, https://cag.gov.in/en/audit- Distribution, Lok Sabha, August 7, 2023,
report/details/119177 https://sansad.in/getFile/lsscommittee/Consumer%20Affairs,%20Foo
84 Report No. 354,‘ Construction of Road over Bridges, Road under d%20and%20Public%20Distribution/17_Consumer_Affairs_Food_a
Bridges, Service Roads and Review of Road Survey Guidelines, nd_Public_Distribution_31.pdf?source=loksabhadocs.
Standing Committee on Transport, Tourism and Culture, Rajya 96 Report No.8, Working of National Commission for Women and
Sabha, August 10, 2023, State Commissions for Women, Standing Committee on
https://sansad.in/rs/committees/20?departmentally-related-standing- Empowerment of Women, August 10, 2023,
committees https://sansad.in/getFile/lsscommittee/Empowerment%20of%20Wom
85 Guidelines for Tariff Based Competitive Bidding Process for en/17_Empowerment_of_Women_8.pdf?source=loksabhadocs.
Procurement of Power from Grid Connected Wind Solar Hybrid 97 CAG Report on Swadesh Darshan Scheme,
Projects, Ministry of Power, August 21, 2023, https://cag.gov.in/uploads/download_audit_report/2023/Report-No.-
https://powermin.gov.in/sites/default/files/webform/notices/Guideline 17-Complete-Page-21.07.2023-064d3a794cf1905.74176946.pdf.
s_for_TBCB_Process_for_Procurement_of_Power_from_Grid_Conn 98 Report No. 131, Review of functioning of recruitment
ected_Wind_Solar_Hybrid_Projects.pdf. organisations of Government of India, Standing Committee on
86 The Electricity Act, 2003, Ministry of Power, May 26, 2003, Personnel, Public Grievances, and Law and Justice, August 3, 2023,
https://www.indiacode.nic.in/bitstream/123456789/2058/1/A2003- https://sansad.in/getFile/rsnew/Committee_site/Committee_File/Repo
36.pdf. rtFile/18/171/131_2023_8_18.pdf?source=rajyasabha.
87 Ministry of Development of North Eastern Region releases new DISCLAIMER: This document is being furnished to you for your
Scheme Guidelines for implementing Cabinet-approved Schemes information. You may choose to reproduce or redistribute this
during 15th Finance Commission's balance period,” Press report for non-commercial purposes in part or in full to any other
Information Bureau, Ministry of Development of North Eastern person with due acknowledgement of PRS Legislative Research
Region, August 21, 2023, (“PRS”). The opinions expressed herein are entirely those of the
https://pib.gov.in/PressReleasePage.aspx?PRID=1950889 author(s). PRS makes every effort to use reliable and
88 ‘Guidelines for North East Special Infrastructure Development comprehensive information, but PRS does not represent that the
Scheme (NESIDS) Road component, Ministry of Development of contents of the report are accurate or complete. PRS is an
North Eastern Region, August 21, 2023, independent, not-for-profit group. This document has been
https://mdoner.gov.in/contentimages/files/Guidelines-of-NESIDS- prepared without regard to the objectives or opinions of those who
(Roads)-23-8-23.pdf may receive it.
89 Guidelines for North East Special Infrastructure Development
Scheme (NESIDS) Other than Road Infrastructure component,
Ministry of Development of North Eastern Region, August 21, 2023,
- 28-
