Monthly Policy Review
July 2023
Highlights of this Issue
Monsoon session 2023 begins (p. 2)
The monsoon session of Parliament began on July 20, 2023. 21 Bills are listed for introduction, consideration,
and passing. These include Bills amending the GNCTD Act and the Registration of Births and Deaths Act.
Lok Sabha passes the Forest Conservation (Amendment) Bill, 2023 (p. 3)
The Bill adds and exempts certain land from the purview of the Forest (Conservation) Act, 1980. The Joint
Committee reviewing the Bill accepted all provisions of the Bill.
Parliament passes the Cinematograph (Amendment) Bill, 2023 (p. 2)
The Bill adds more age based categories for certification of film. It prohibits carrying out or abetting
unauthorised recording and unauthorised exhibition of films.
Lok Sabha passed eight Bills
Three of these were introduced the current session. These include the National Dental Commission Bill, 2023
and the Mines and Minerals (Development and Regulation) Amendment Bill, 2023.
The Registration of Births and Deaths (Amendment) Bill, 2023 introduced (p. 4)
The Bill establishes a national database of registered births and deaths, which can be shared with approved
authorities. The Bill requires the Aadhaar details of parents and informats in cases of births.
Lok Sabha passes the Jan Vishwas (Amendment of Provisions) Bill, 2022 (p. 4)
The Bill aims to increase ease of doing business by decriminalising and removing imprisonment as a
punishment from various laws.
Electricity (Amendment) Rules, 2023 notified (p. 14)
The Rules allow for wider ownership of captive power plants via subsidiaries and alters the calculations of
Renewable Energy tariffs.
SEBI releases framework for regulation of ESG rating providers (p. 11)
It provides for the regulation of credit rating agencies. SEBI amended the Credit Ranking Agencies
Regulations, 1999 to establish a framework providing environmental, social, and governance (ESG) ratings.
Standing Committees submit reports on various subjects and policies
Reports submitted include the farm mechanisation for small farmers, the Neighborhood First Policy, the
functioning of National Akademis and cyber security.
Scheme launched for the expansion and modernisation of fire services (p. 5)
The scheme will have an outlay of Rs 5,000 crore and will be administered under the National Disaster
Response Fund. The aim of the scheme is to help with the preparedness of fire services at the state-level.
UGC amends the minimum criteria for Assistant Professors (p. 9)
The amendment allows persons with a P.h.D degree to be eligible for recruitment as an Assistant Professor.
They must have passed the NET/SLET/SET exam.
Draft Rules to prevent animal cruelty released (p. 15)
The Draft Rules specify that the Societies for Prevention of Cruelty to Animals must establish a 24x7 helpline
number for reporting case of animal cruelty and assist in animal birth control programmes in their district.
August 1, 2023
PRS Legislative Research ◼ Institute for Policy Research Studies
3rd Floor, Gandharva Mahavidyalaya ◼ 212, Deen Dayal Upadhyaya Marg ◼ New Delhi – 110002
Tel: (011) 23234801, 43434035 ◼ www.prsindia.org
Monthly Policy Review – July 2023 PRS Legislative Research
Parliament Figure 1: Monthly inflation in Q1 of 2023-24 (%
change, year-on-year)
Arpita Mallick (arpita@prsindia.org)
6% 4.7% 4.8%
5% 4.3% 4.5%
Monsoon Session 2023 begins 3.8%
4% 3.0%
3%
The Monsoon Session 2023 commenced on July 20,
2%
2023. It is scheduled to be held till August 11, 2023,
1%
with 17 sitting days.
0%
21 Bills are listed for introduction, consideration, and -1%
-0.8%
passing. These include the Government of National -2%
-3%
Capital Territory of Delhi (Amendment) Bill, 2023, the
-4%
Digital Personal Data Protection Bill, 2023 and the -3.5%
-5% -4.1%
Registration of Births and Deaths (Amendment) Bill,
CPI Food Inflation WPI
2023. Eight Bills are listed for consideration and
passing in this session. These include the Forest Apr-23 May-23 Jun-23
(Conservation) Amendment Bill, 2023, the Jan
Vishwas (Amendment of Provision) Bill, 2022 and the Sources: MoSPI; Ministry of Commerce and Industry; PRS.
Biological Diversity (Amendment) Bill, 2023.
Three Bills were passed by Parliament, which includes
the Cinematograph (Amendment) Bill, 2023. Eight
Information and Broadcasting
Bills were passed by Lok Sabha, which include (i) the
Biological Diversity (Amendment) Bill, 2023, (ii) the
Pratinav Damani (pratinav@prsindia.org)
Multi-State Co-operative Societies (Amendment) Bill,
2022 and (iii) the Forest (Conservation) Amendment
The Cinematograph (Amendment) Bill, 2023
Bill, 2023.
passed in Parliament
For more details on the legislative business to be taken
The Cinematograph (Amendment) Bill, 2023 was
up during Monsoon Session 2023, please see here.
introduced in Rajya Sabha on July 20, 2023. It was
passed by Rajya Sabha on July 27, 2023 and passed by
Lok Sabha on July 31, 2023. The Bill amends the
Cinematograph Act, 1952.3 The Act constitutes the
Macroeconomic Development Board of Film Certification for certifying films for
exhibition.4 Such certifications may be subject to
Tushar Chakrabarty (tushar@prsindia.org)
modifications or deletions. The Board may also refuse
the exhibition of films. Features of the Bill include:
Consumer Price Index inflation was 4.6% in
the first quarter of 2023-24
▪ Additional certificate categories: The Bill adds
certain additional certificate categories based on
Consumer Price Index (CPI) inflation was 4.6% in the
age. The changes are outlined in the table below.
first quarter (April-June) of 2023-24, significantly
lower than 7.3% in the first quarter of 2022-23.1 In the Note that the age endorsement within the U/A
category is for the information of the
fourth quarter (January-March) of 2022-23, CPI
parent/guardian and enforceable only by them.
inflation was 6.2%.
Table 1: Age categories for movie certification
Food inflation averaged 3.8% in the first quarter of
2023-24. This was due to a high base as food inflation Act Bill
was 8% in the corresponding quarter of 2022-23. In U: Universal viewing
the fourth quarter of 2022-23, food inflation was 5.6%.
U/A 7+
Wholesale Price Index (WPI) inflation was -2.8% in ▪ U/A 12+ U/A 13+
the first quarter of 2023-24 as compared to 16.1% in
U/A 16+
the first quarter of 2022-23.2 In the fourth quarter of
2022-23, WPI inflation averaged 3.4%. Adult: 18+
S: Restricted to members of a specific profession or class
Sources: The Cinematograph Act, 1952, The Cinematograph
(Amendment) Bill, 2023; PRS.
▪ Separate certificate for television/other media:
Films with an ‘A’ or ‘S’ certificate will require a
separate certificate for exhibition on television, or
any other media prescribed by the central
- 2-
Monthly Policy Review – July 2023 PRS Legislative Research
government. The Board may direct the applicant Change clarified that the second applicability
to carry appropriate deletions or modifications for condition in the Bill includes all such lands
the separate certificate. recorded as forests before October 25, 1980.
▪ Unauthorised recording and exhibition to be ▪ Lands exempted: Exempted categories of land
punishable: The Bill prohibits carrying out or includes forest land within 100 km along
abetting: (i) unauthorised recording and (ii) international borders, LoC, or LAC for linear
unauthorised exhibition of films. Attempts to projects of strategic national importance or
create an unauthorised recording will also be an security. A dissent note highlighted that the Bill
offence. An unauthorised recording means making exempts Himalayan and north eastern forests from
a copy of a film at a licensed place for film the Act, which are rich with endemic biodiversity.
exhibition without the owner’s authorisation. An It noted that such blanket exemptions will impact
unauthorised exhibition refers to publically biodiversity and the infrastructure itself due to
exhibiting an infringing copy of a film for profit. resulting extreme weather events.
For a PRS summary of the Bill, please see here. For further analysis on the Bill, please see here.
The Biological Diversity (Amendment) Bill,
2021 passed by Lok Sabha
Environment
Saket Surya (saket@prsindia.org)
Joint Parliamentary Committee submits report
The Biological Diversity (Amendment) Bill, 2021 was
on the Forest Bill, 2023 passed by Lok Sabha.8 The Bill was introduced in
Tanvi Vipra (tanvi@prsindia.org)
December 2021.9 It amends the Biological Diversity
Act, 2002.10 The Act provides for the conservation of
biological resources, and benefit sharing with local
The Forest (Conservation) Amendment Bill, 2023 was
communities upon access to biological resources and
passed by Lok Sabha on July 26, 2023. The Forest
associated knowledge. The Act sets up the National
(Conservation) Act, 1980 requires central government
Biodiversity Authority (NBA) and State Biodiversity
permission for using forest land for non-forest
purposes.5 The Bill defines forest land, and exempts Board (SBB) for regulation.
certain categories of land from the purview of the Act. ▪ Exemption from prior intimation to SBB: Under
Exemptions include land up to 10 hectares for the Act, domestic entities must intimate SBB
constructing security related infrastructure.6 The Bill before obtaining biological resources occurring in
also permits running zoos, safaris, and eco-tourism India for commercial utilisation. Certain activities
facilities inside forests. are exempt from this requirement: (i) use by local
people and communities including growers and
The Joint Committee on the Bill (Chair: Mr Rajendra
cultivators, and (ii) vaids and hakims practising
Agarwal) presented its report in Parliament on July 20,
2023.7 The Committee endorsed all the amendments indigenous medicine. The Bill adds that access to
knowledge associated with biological resources for
under the Bill. Five members of the Committee
commercial utilisation will also require prior
submitted dissent notes highlighting biodiversity loss.
intimation. It also exempts the following from the
Key highlights of the Bill and recommendations of
prior intimation requirement: (i) access to codified
Committee are:
traditional knowledge, (ii) use of cultivated
▪ Land under the purview of the Act: As per the medicinal plants and their products, and (iii) use by
Bill, the Act will apply to two types of land: (i) AYUSH practitioners for sustenance and
land notified as a forest under any law, or (ii) land livelihood.
recorded as a forest as on or after October 25, 1980
▪ Benefit sharing: The Act makes benefit-sharing
in a government record. The Committee noted that
provisions applicable to research activities,
the Supreme Court (1996) held that the Act applies
commercial utilisation, as well as bio-survey and
to any area recorded as a forest in government
bio-utilisation for certain entities. The Bill
records. This would include land recorded as
removes its applicability from research, bio-survey
forests before October 25, 1980.
and bio-utilisation. Benefit sharing refers to
▪ According to a dissent note, large tracts of forest requiring sharing of monetary and non-monetary
land were transferred to the forest department in benefits with benefit claimers and local people.
the 1950s-70s (abolishment of zamindari). These Benefit claimers are conservers of biodiversity, or
were not notified as forests under any law, and are creators or holders of associated knowledge.
biodiversity hotspots that are currently protected
▪ Decriminalisation of offences: Under the Act,
under the Act. It noted that excluding such forest
offences include failing to take approval or
land would dilute the Supreme Court’s judgement.
providing prior intimation for various activities.
The Ministry of Environment, Forest and Climate
These offences are punishable with imprisonment
- 3-
Monthly Policy Review – July 2023 PRS Legislative Research
of up to five years, or a fine, or both. The Bill Act, 1923. In addition, the Committee
decriminalises the offences and makes offences recommended amendments which allow the central
punishable with a penalty between one lakh rupees government to appoint an appellate authority for
and Rs 50 lakh. decisions of the adjudicating officer. For some
laws, the recommended amendments specify that
For a PRS analysis of the Bill, see here.
appellate authorities must be of at least one rank
above an adjudicating officer. Laws for which the
Committee has recommended such amendments
include: (i) the Boilers Act, 1923, (ii) the Rubber
Commerce
Act, 1947, and (iii) the Pharmacy Act, 1948.
Tushar Chakrabarty (tushar@prsindia.org) For a PRS analysis of the Bill, see here.
Lok Sabha passes Jan Vishwas (Amendment of
Provisions) Bill, 2022
Home Affairs
The Jan Vishwas (Amendment of Provisions) Bill,
2022 was passed by Lok Sabha.11 The Bill aims to
Alaya Purewal (alaya@prsindia.org)
improve ease of doing business by decriminalising and
removing imprisonment as a punishment from various
Bill to amend the Registration of Births and
laws. The Joint Committee (Chair: Mr. P.P.
Deaths Act, 1969, introduced
Chaudhary) setup to scrutinise the Bill submitted its
report on March 17, 2023.12 The Bill as reported by the The Registration of Births and Deaths (Amendment)
Joint Committee was passed by Lok Sabha. All the Bill, 2023, was introduced in Lok Sabha.13 It amends
recommendations by the Committee were accepted. the Registration of Births and Deaths Act, 1969.14 The
Key features include: Act provides for the regulation of registration of births
and deaths. Key features of the Bill include:
▪ Amendments to punishments: The Bill reduces
fines and penalties for various contraventions and ▪ Database of births and deaths: The Act provides
offences under the principal Acts. It also converts for the appointment of a Registrar-General, India
some fines to penalties, which need not be imposed who may issue general directions for registration
through the judicial process. For some provisions, of births and deaths. The Bill adds that the
the Committee recommended amendments to the Registrar General will maintain a national database
severity of penalties. For example, under the of registered births and deaths. Chief Registrars
Pharmacy Act, 1948, the Committee recommended (appointed by states) and Registrars (appointed by
increasing the penalty for falsely pretending to be states for each local area jurisdiction) will be
in a state register of pharmacists. This offence is obligated to share data of registered births and
currently punishable with a fine of up to five deaths to the national database. The Chief
hundred rupees for the first offence. Under the Registrar shall maintain a similar database at the
Bill, a first offence would be punishable by a state level.
penalty of up Rs 50,000. The committee
▪ Aadhaar details of parents and informants
recommended enhancing this penalty to one lakh
required: The Act requires certain persons to
rupees. Other offences have been made
report births and deaths to the Registrar. For
compoundable, such as trespassing of cattle under
example, the medical officer in charge of a hospital
the Indian Forest Act, 1927.
where a baby is born must report the birth. The
▪ Adjudication of penalties: The Bill provides for Bill adds that, in cases of births, the specified
the central government to appoint adjudicating persons shall also provide the Aadhaar number of
officers to (i) conduct inquiries into the parents and the informant, if available. This
contraventions, (ii) summon individuals for provision also applies to: (i) jailor in case of births
evidence, and (iii) decide and impose penalties. in a jail, and (ii) manager of a hotel or lodge in
The Bill removes imprisonment as a punishment case of births in such a place. Further, it expands
from some laws, but does not introduce the list of specified persons to include: (i) adoptive
adjudicating authorities for them. The Committee parents for non-institutional adoption, (ii)
recommended amendments that do so. This may biological parent for births through surrogacy, and
be an existing official or body, such as the Reserve (iii) the parent in case of birth of a child to a single
Bank of India, for contraventions under the parent or unwed mother.
Government Securities Act, 2006. For other laws,
▪ Connecting database: The Bill states that the
the Committee recommended that an officer of a
national database may be made available to other
given rank may be notified as the Adjudicating
authorities preparing or maintaining other
Officer. For example, the Committee
databases. Such databases include: (i) population
recommended that the District Magistrate be the
register, (ii) electoral rolls, (iii) ration card, and
designated Adjudicating Officer under the Boilers
- 4-
Monthly Policy Review – July 2023 PRS Legislative Research
(iv) any other national databases as notified. The of the scheme is to help with preparedness and capacity
use of the national database must be approved by building of fire services at the state-level. An amount
the central government. Similarly, the state of Rs 500 crore, of the total outlay, has been kept to
database may be made available to authorities incentivise states based on their legal and
dealing with other state databases, subject to. state infrastructure-based reforms. For seeking funds for
government’s approval. projects under the scheme, concerned state
governments will contribute 25% and Northeastern and
For a PRS analysis of the Bill, see here.
Himalayan states will contribute 10% of the total cost.
Bill to amend Jammu and Kashmir
Reorganisation Act, 2019, introduced
Law and Justice
The Jammu and Kashmir Reorganisation (Amendment)
Bill, 2023 was introduced in Lok Sabha.15 The Bill
Alaya Purewal (alaya@prsindia.org)
amends the Jammu and Kashmir Reorganisation Act,
2019.16 The Act provides for the reorganisation of the
Lok Sabha passes the Repealing and Amending
state of Jammu and Kashmir into the union territories
Bill, 2022
of Jammu and Kashmir (with legislature) and Ladakh
(without legislature). The Repealing and Amending Bill, 2022, was passed
by Lok Sabha on July 27, 2022.19 It repeals 65 laws
▪ Number of seats in the Legislative Assembly:
that are obsolete or that have been made redundant by
The Second Schedule of the Representation of the
other laws. It also corrects a minor drafting error in the
People Act, 1950 provides for the number of seats
Factoring Regulation Act, 2011.20 Key features of the
in legislative assemblies.17 The 2019 Act amended
Bill include the following:
the Second Schedule of the 1950 Act to specify the
total number of seats in the Jammu and Kashmir ▪ Repeal of laws: The First Schedule of the Bill lists
Legislative Assembly to be 83. It reserved six 24 laws that would be repealed. Of these, 16 are
seats for Scheduled Castes. No seats were amending Acts, and two are from before 1947.
reserved for Scheduled Tribes. The Bill increases
▪ Repeal of Appropriation Acts: The Second
the total number of seats to 90. It also reserves
Schedule of the Bill lists 41 Appropriation Acts
seven seats for Scheduled Castes and nine seats for
that would be repealed. These Acts span the years
Scheduled Tribes.
from 2013 to 2017.
▪ In addition, the Act provides 24 seats to be
For a PRS Bill summary of the Bill, see here.
allocated for constituencies in Pakistani-occupied
Jammu and Kashmir.
▪ Nomination of Kashmiri migrants: The Bill adds
that the Lieutenant Governor may nominate up to
Mines
two members from the Kashmiri migrant
community to the Legislative Assembly. One of
Pratinav Damani (pratinav@prsindia.org)
the nominated members must be a woman.
Migrants are defined as persons who migrated
Mines and Minerals (Development and
from the Kashmir Valley or any other part of the
Regulation) Amendment Bill, 2023 passed by
state of Jammu and Kashmir after November 1,
Lok Sabha
1989, and are registered with the Relief
Commissioner. Migrants also include unregistered The Mines and Minerals (Development and
individuals who are: (i) in government service at a Regulation) Amendment Bill, 2023 was introduced on
moving office, (ii) have left for work, or (iii) July 26, 2023 in Lok Sabha. It was passed by Lok
possess immovable property at the place from Sabha on July 28, 2023. The Bill amends the Mines
where they migrated but are unable to reside there and Minerals (Development and Regulation) Act,
due to disturbed conditions. 1957.21 The Act regulates the mining sector.22
For a PRS summary of the Bill, see here. ▪ Reconnaissance to include sub-surface
activities: The Act defines reconnaissance
Scheme launched for the expansion and
operations as operations undertaken for
modernisation of fire services preliminary prospecting and includes: (i) aerial
surveys, (ii) geophysical, and (iii) geochemical
The Ministry of Home Affairs has launched a scheme
surveys. It also includes geological mapping. The
for the expansion and modernisation of fire services in
Act prohibits pitting, trenching, drilling, and sub-
states.18 The scheme will have an outlay of Rs 5,000
surface excavation as part of reconnaissance, the
crore and will fall under the earmarked allocation of
Bill allows these activities.
Preparedness and Capacity Building Funding Window
under the National Disaster Response Fund. The aim
- 5-
Monthly Policy Review – July 2023 PRS Legislative Research
▪ Exploration licence for specified minerals: The on which provisions of the Bill come into effect,
Act provides for following types of concessions: will be void. An exploration licence granted
(i) a reconnaissance permit for reconnaissance, (ii) before the date on which provisions of the Bill
a prospecting licence for prospecting, (iii) mining come into effect will be ineligible to acquire a
lease for undertaking mining, and (iv) a composite production lease on the explored area.
licence, for prospecting and mining. The Bill
▪ Offshore Areas Mineral Trust: The Bill sets up
introduces an exploration licence, which will
the Offshore Areas Mineral Trust. Concession
authorise either reconnaissance or prospecting, or
holders will be required to pay an amount to the
both activities for specified minerals.
Trust in addition to any royalty. The funds will be
▪ The exploration licence will be issued for 29 used for specified purposes including: (i)
minerals specified in the Seventh Schedule. These exploration in offshore areas, (ii) research and
include gold, silver, copper, cobalt, nickel, lead, studies about the mitigation of adverse effects of
potash, and rock phosphate. These also include six offshore mining on the ecology, and (iii) relief
minerals classified as atomic minerals under the upon the occurrence of a disaster.
Act: (i) beryl and beryllium, (ii) lithium, (iii)
For a PRS summary of the Bill, please see here.
niobium, (iv) titanium, (v) tantallium, and (vi)
zirconium. The Bill declassifies them as atomic
minerals. The Act reserves prospecting and
mining of atomic minerals for government entities.
Health and Family Welfare
▪ Auction of certain minerals by the central
government: Under the Act, auction of
The National Nursing and Midwifery
concessions is undertaken by the state
Commission Bill, 2023 passed by Lok Sabha
governments, except in certain specified cases.
The Bill adds that auction for composite licence Priyadarshini Jain (priyadarshini@prsindia.org)
and mining lease for specified critical and strategic
minerals will be conducted by the central The National Nursing and Midwifery Commission Bill,
government. These minerals include lithium, 2023 was introduced on July 24, 2023 in Lok Sabha.25
cobalt, nickel, phosphate, potash, tin, phosphate, It was passed by Lok Sabha on July 28, 2023. It repeals
and potash. However, concessions will still be the Indian Nursing Council Act, 1947.26 The Bill
granted by the state government. provides for the regulation and maintenance of
standards of education and services for nursing and
For a PRS summary of the Bill, please see here.
midwifery professionals.
Offshore Areas Mineral (Development and ▪ National Nursing and Midwifery Commission:
Regulation) Amendment Bill, 2023 introduced The Bill provides for the constitution of the
National Nursing and Midwifery Commission. It
in Lok Sabha
will consist of 29 members. The chairperson
The Offshore Areas Mineral (Development and should have a postgraduate degree in nursing and
Regulation) Amendment Bill, 2023 was introduced in midwifery and have at least 20 years of field
Lok Sabha. The Bill amends the Offshore Areas experience. Ex-officio members include
Mineral (Development and Regulation) Act, 2002.23 representatives from the Department of Health and
The Act regulates mining in maritime zones of India.24 Family Welfare, the National Medical Commission,
Key features of the Bill include: Military Nursing Services, and the Directorate
General of Health Services. Other members
▪ Introduction of a composite licence: The Bill
include nursing and midwifery professionals, and
introduces a composite licence for granting rights
one representative from charitable institutions.
for exploration and production operations. Under
the composite license, the licensee will be required ▪ Functions of the Commission: These include: (i)
to complete exploration within three years. This framing policies and regulating standards for
may be extended by two years upon application by nursing and midwifery education, (ii) providing a
the licensee. If mineral resources have been uniform process for admission into nursing and
established, the licensee will be granted one or midwifery institutions, (iii) regulating nursing and
more production leases for the explored area. The midwifery institutions, and (iv) providing standards
production lease will be valid for 50 years. for faculty in teaching institutions.
▪ Auction mandatory for certain concessions: ▪ Autonomous boards: The Bill provides for the
The Act provides for the grant of concessions constitution of three autonomous boards under the
through administrative allocation. The Bill supervision of the National Commission. These
mandates competitive bidding for a production are: (i) the Nursing and Midwifery Undergraduate
lease and a composite license to private entities. and Postgraduate Education Board, to regulate
Applications for production leases before the date education and examination at undergraduate and
- 6-
Monthly Policy Review – July 2023 PRS Legislative Research
postgraduate levels; (ii) the Nursing and ICMR issues policy statement on Controlled
Midwifery Assessment and Rating Board, to Human Infection Studies
provide the framework for assessing and rating
Rutvik Upadhyaya (rutvik@prsindia.org)
nursing and midwifery institutions; and (iii) the
Nursing and Midwifery Ethics and Registration
The Indian Council of Medical Research (ICMR)
Board, to regulate professional conduct and
released a draft consensus policy statement on ‘The
promote ethics in the profession.
Ethical Conduct of Controlled Human Infection Studies
▪ Practising as a professional: The Ethics and in India’.28 These studies involve intentionally exposing
Registration Board will maintain an online Indian healthy human volunteers to a specific pathogen under
Nurses and Midwives’ Register, containing the controlled conditions. This helps in understanding the
details and qualifications of professionals and nature of a pathogen, immune responses to its exposure,
associates. Individuals must be enrolled in the and assists in developing vaccines and treatments.
National or State Register to practice nursing or Despite the scientific benefits of such studies, there are
midwifery as qualified professionals. Failure to some ethical issues such as deliberate harm,
comply may result in imprisonment of up to one year, disproportionate payment, and research with vulnerable
a fine of up to five lakh rupees, or both. participants. The draft Policy aims to address ethical
concerns while ensuring that such research can be
For PRS summary, please see here.
conducted. Key highlights of the policy include:
The National Dental Commission Bill, 2023 ▪ Responsible conduct of research: Controlled
passed by Lok Sabha Human Infection Studies must be carried out by
institutions with extensive experience in clinical
Rutvik Upadhyaya (rutvik@prsindia.org)
trials and proven academic/ research excellence.
Researchers must be trained in accordance with
The National Dental Commission Bill, 2023 was
existing ICMR ethical guidelines for health
introduced in Lok Sabha on July 24, 2023.27 It was
research on humans. Since the research area is
passed by Lok Sabha on July 28, 2023. The Bill
complex, collaboration between various
repeals the Dentists Act, 1948 and constitutes: (i) the
researchers and institutions is highly encouraged.
National Dental Commission, (ii) the Dental Advisory
Council and (iii) three autonomous Boards for ▪ Ethical safeguards: Participants must be
regulating dental education and standards of dentistry. provided with detailed information of the study,
Key features of the Bill are: and written informed consent must be taken before
conducting any study. Further, the participants
▪ National Dental Commission: The central
must be healthy adults aged 18-45, who are
government is required to constitute a National
participating out of altruistic motives. Graduates
Dental Commission consisting of 33 members. It
may be preferred. Individuals belonging to
will be chaired by an eminent and experienced
vulnerable social, economic and physiological
dentist. The Chairperson will be appointed by the
conditions should be excluded currently. Since the
central government, upon the recommendation of a
data collected from such studies is sensitive, its use
search-cum-selection committee. The Search
should be limited to the purpose of the study.
Committee will be chaired by the Cabinet
These studies must be reviewed for compliance by
Secretary. Ex-officio members of the Commission
the Ethics Committee constituted under the ICMR
include: (i) Presidents of the three autonomous
National Ethical Guidelines, 2017.
Boards, (ii) the Director General of Health
Services, (iii) Chief of the Centre for Dental and ▪ Compensation for participation: Researchers
Educational Research, All India Institute of may reimburse participants, taking medical
Medical Sciences. Part time members of the discomfort and any other inconveniences into
Commission include: (i) faculties of dentistry from account. In case of unknown risks/harms
government institutes and (ii) representatives of associated with the study, there must be adequate
states and union territories. insurance provisions.
▪ Functions of the Commission include: (i) Comments on the draft Policy are invited until August
regulating governance standards for dental 16, 2023.
education, examination, and training, (ii)
regulating dental institutions and research, (iii)
assessing infrastructure requirements in dental
healthcare, and (iv) ensuring that admissions to
Bachelor of Dental Surgery happen through the
National Eligibility-cum-Entrance Test (NEET).
For a PRS Summary of the Bill, see here.
- 7-
Monthly Policy Review – July 2023 PRS Legislative Research
Cooperation Education
Alaya Purewal (alaya@prsindia.org) Rutvik Upadhyaya (rutvik@prsindia.org)
The Multi-State Co-operative Societies IIM (Amendment) Bill, 2023 introduced in the
(Amendment) Bill, 2022 passed by Lok Sabha Lok Sabha
The Multi-State Co-operative Societies (Amendment) The Indian Institutes of Management (Amendment)
Bill, 2022, was passed by the Lok Sabha.29 It amends Bill, 2023 was introduced in Lok Sabha.31 The Bill
the Multi-State Co-operative Societies Act, 2002.30 amends the Indian Institutes of Management Act, 2017.
Multi state co-operative societies operate in more than The Act declares Indian Institutes of Management
one state. The Bill was referred to a Joint (IIMs) as institutes of national importance and
Parliamentary Committee on December 22, 2022. The regulates their functioning. IIMs provide post-graduate
Committee approved the provisions of the Bill. Key education in the field of management and allied areas.
provisions of the Bill include:
▪ Visitor: The Bill designates the President of India
▪ Election of board members: Under the Act, as Visitor of every Institute covered by the Act.
elections to the board of a multi-state co-operative The Visitor is granted with powers that include: (i)
society are conducted by its existing board. The initiating inquiries into the functioning of IIMs, (ii)
Bill amends this to specify that the central taking action against Institutes to ensure
government will establish the Co-operative compliance, (iii) appointing the Chairperson of the
Election Authority to: (i) conduct such elections, Co-ordination Forum.
(ii) supervise, direct and control the preparation of
▪ Appointment and removal of IIM Directors:
electoral rolls, and (iii) perform other prescribed
Under the Act, the Director of an IIM is appointed
functions. The Authority will consist of a
by the Board of Governors, based on the
chairperson, vice-chairperson, and up to three
recommendations of a Search-cum-Selection
members appointed by the central government on
Committee. The Bill mandates the Board to obtain
the recommendations of a selection committee.
the prior approval of the Visitor before appointing
▪ Redressal of complaints: As per the Bill, the an Institute Director. The procedure for selecting
central government will appoint one or more Co- the Director will be prescribed by the central
operative Ombudsman with territorial jurisdiction. government. Under the Act, the Search Committee
The Ombudsman shall inquire into complaints comprises of the Chairperson of the Board, and
made by members of co-operative societies three members from amongst eminent
regarding: (i) their deposits, (ii) equitable benefits administrators, industrialists, educationists. The
of the society’s functioning, or (iii) issues affecting Bill reduces these three members to two, and adds
the individual rights of the members. The another member to be nominated by the Visitor.
Ombudsman shall complete the process of inquiry
▪ Under the Act, the Board may remove the Director
and adjudication within three months from the
from office on grounds such as: (i) insolvency, (ii)
receipt of the complaint. Appeals against the
mental and physical incapacity, (iii) conflict of
directions of the Ombudsman may be filed with
interest. The Bill adds that the Board will require
the Central Registrar (who is appointed by the
prior approval of the Visitor before removing a
central government) within a month.
Director. The Bill also grants the Visitor the
▪ Amalgamation of co-operative societies: The Act authority to terminate the services of the Director,
provides for the amalgamation and division of as may be prescribed.
multi-state co-operative societies. This can be
▪ Appointment of the Chairperson of the Board
done by passing a resolution at a general assembly.
of Governors: Under the Act, the Chairperson of
It requires at least two-thirds of the members,
the Board of Governors of each Institute is
present and voting. The Bill allows co-operative
appointed by the Board. The Bill amends this to
societies (registered under state laws) to merge into
provide that the Chairperson of the Board will be
an existing multi-state co-operative society. At
nominated by the Visitor.
least two-thirds of the members of the co-operative
society present and voting at a general meeting ▪ NITE, Mumbai: The Bill classifies the National
must pass a resolution to allow such a merger. Institute of Industrial Engineering (NITIE),
Mumbai as IIM, Mumbai.
For a further analysis on the Bill, see here.
For a PRS Summary of the Bill, see here.
- 8-
Monthly Policy Review – July 2023 PRS Legislative Research
UGC amends the minimum criteria for direct Social Justice
recruitment to the post of Assistant Professor
Alaya Purewal (alaya@prsindia.org)
The University Grants Commission (UGC) released
new Regulations for minimum qualifications for Parliament passes two bills to amend the
appointment of Assistant Professors in Higher
Constitution (Scheduled Tribes) Order, 1950
Education Institutions.32 These supersede the 2018
Regulations. Earlier, appointees required a P.h.D Parliament passed the Constitution (Scheduled Tribes)
degree as the minimum qualification to be eligible for Order (Third Amendment) Bill, 2022 and the
recruitment as an Assistant Professor.33 Now, if Constitution (Scheduled Tribes) Order (Fifth
candidates do not have a P.h.D degree, they may be Amendment) Bill, 2022.37,38 These Bills amend the
appointed if they pass the NET/SET/SLET exam Constitution (Scheduled Tribes) Order, 1950 with
conducted by UGC, the Council for Industrial and respect to its application to Himachal Pradesh and
Scientific Research (in the case of NET), or (iii) bodies Chhattisgarh.39 The Third Amendment Bill includes
accredited by UGC.34,35 the Hattee community of Trans Giri of Sirmour district
in the list of Scheduled Tribes in Himachal Pradesh.
UGC releases draft guidelines on university- The Fifth Amendment Bill includes the Dhanuhar,
industry linkage system Dhanuwar, Kisan, Saunra, Saonra, and Binjhia
communities in the list of Scheduled Tribes in
The University Grants Commission (UGC) released Chhattisgarh. The Bill also includes three Devnagari
draft Guidelines on Sustainable and Vibrant University- versions of the name of the Pando community.
Industry Linkage System for Indian Universities.36
For a PRS summary, see here and here.
These guidelines were issued in pursuance of the
objectives of the National Education Policy (NEP).
The Constitution (Scheduled Castes) Order
Amongst other things, NEP highlights the necessity of
a university-industry linkage system to drive innovation (Amendment) Bill, 2023 introduced
and enhance the competence of students. The aim of
The Constitution (Scheduled Castes) Order
the university-industry linkage system is to: (i) boost
(Amendment) Bill, 2023, was introduced in Lok
Research and Development (R&D), and (ii) enhance
Sabha.40 The Bill amends the Constitution (Scheduled
student internship and apprenticeship in academic and
Caste) Order, 1950, with respect to its application to
industrial systems.
Chhattisgarh.39 The Bill includes Mahara and Mahra
In order to boost R&D, the guidelines propose R&D communities as synonyms of the Mehra, Mahar, and
clusters of industries and universities at the state level. Mehar communities in Chhattisgarh.
These clusters will help address the technological needs
For a PRS summary, see here.
of the region. Each industry will establish a University
Relations Cell, and each university will establish an
Two Bills to amend the Scheduled Castes and
Industry Relations Cell. Both bodies will be required
Scheduled Tribes for Jammu and Kashmir,
to liaison with each other and with other stakeholders
in order to assess technological needs of the region and
introduced
undertake research of regional/local relevance.
The Constitution (Jammu and Kashmir) Scheduled
To enhance student internship and apprenticeship Tribes Order Amendment Bill, 2023 and the
systems, the guidelines propose greater integration of Constitution (Jammu and Kashmir) Scheduled Castes
industries in university education. This will be done Order Amendment Bill, 2023 were introduced in Lok
through: (i) appointment of highly experienced industry Sabha.41,42 They amend the Jammu and Kashmir
professionals as professors and members on university Scheduled Tribes Order, 1956 and the Jammu and
boards, (ii) organisation of training programmes and Kashmir Scheduled Castes Order, 1956,
workshops with industries, and (iii) provision of
respectively.43,44
collaborative degree programmes and research projects
The Constitution (Jammu and Kashmir) Scheduled
between industries and universities. Universities may
Tribes Order Amendment Bill, 2023 adds the Gadda
introduce internship and apprenticeship requirements
Brahmin, Koli, Paddari Tribe, and Pahari Ethnic Group
for students irrespective of their fields. They may also
to the list of Scheduled Tribes in Jammu and Kashmir.
provide greater institutional support for linking students
with opportunities for the same. The Constitution (Jammu and Kashmir) Scheduled
Castes Order Amendment Bill, 2023 adds Valmiki
community as a synonym of Chura, Balmiki, Bhangi,
and Mehtar communities. The synonym will apply
only in the Union Territory of Jammu and Kashmir.
For a PRS summary of the Bills, see here and here.
- 9-
Monthly Policy Review – July 2023 PRS Legislative Research
Defence recorded in writing. The Committee observed that
the Bill did not define the reasons or causes under
Tushar Chakrabarty (tushar@prsindia.org) which an officer would be authorised to enter
without prior notification. The Department replied
Standing Committee submits report on Inter- that an approval would only be given in
Services Organisations Bill, 2023 exceptional cases where a prior notice would
defeat the purpose of the inspection (such as illegal
The Standing Committee on Defence (Chair: Mr. Jual
antibiotic use). While the Committee accepted the
Oram) submitted its report on the Inter-Services
proposed amendment, it highlighted that the
Organisations (Command, Control and Discipline) Bill,
Department should put in adequate safeguards to
2023.45 The central government may constitute an
prevent its misuse.
Inter-services Organisation, which has personnel
belonging to at least two of the three services: the For a PRS analysis of the Bill, please see here.
army, the navy, and the air force. The Bill empowers
the Commander-in-Chief or Officer-in-Command of Standing Committee submits report on farm
Inter-services Organisations to exercise disciplinary or mechanisation for small farmers
administrative control over the service personnel under
The Standing Committee on Agriculture, Animal
their command, irrespective of their service. The
Husbandry and Food Processing (Chair: Mr P.C.
Committee agreed with the provisions of the Bill.
Gaddigoudar) presented its report on ‘Research and
For a PRS summary of the Bill, see here. Development in Farm Mechanisation for Small and
Marginal Farmers in the Country’.49 Mechanisation of
agriculture improves productivity, ensures judicious
input use, and enables farmers to undertake commercial
Agriculture agriculture instead of subsistence farming. Key
observations and recommendations include:
Pratinav Damani (pratinav@prsindia.org)
▪ Status of farm mechanisation: As of August
2022, 47% of agricultural activities are mechanised
Report on Coastal Aquaculture Authority
in India. This is lower than other developing
(Amendment) Bill, 2023 submitted
countries such as China (60%) and Brazil (75%).
The Standing Committee on Agriculture, Animal Further, small and marginal agricultural holdings
Husbandry and Food Processing (Chair: Mr. P. C. (less than two hectares) account for 86% of total
Gaddigoudar) submitted its report on the ‘Coastal operational holdings. The Committee highlighted
Aquaculture Authority (Amendment) Bill, 2023’ on that unless machines appropriate for small
July 21, 2023.46 The Bill amends the Coastal holdings are made available or substantial farm
Aquaculture Authority Act, 2005.47 The Act regulates land consolidation takes place, small farmers will
coastal aquaculture and establishes an Authority for find it difficult to purchase their own machinery.
such regulation.48 Coastal aquaculture refers to rearing It also noted that it would take about 25 years for
and cultivating fish under controlled conditions. Key the country to achieve 75-80% mechanisation.
observations of the Committee include: The Committee highlighted that there is an urgent
need to enable farmers to take on additional crops,
▪ Permitting certain aquaculture activities in
to make agriculture attractive and profitable.
CRZ areas: The Bill permits hatcheries, nucleus
While noting various initiatives such as the Sub-
breeding centres and brood stock multiplication
Mission on Agricultural Mechanisation, the
centres to be established in no-development zones
Committee recommended that the government
of seas and in buffer zones of creeks/rivers/
must prioritise mechanisation of small farms and
backwaters. The Department noted that while the
that the government achieve 75% mechanisation in
CRZ permitted such activities, the National Green
less than 25 years.
Tribunal did not allow them to be carried out due
to the absence of an explicit provision in law. The Table 2: Mechanisation level across crops
Committee noted that these activities were granted Crop Rice Wheat Pulses Sugarcane Overall
exemption under the Coastal Regulation Zone
Level 53% 69% 41% 35% 47%
(CRZ) Notifications of 1991 and 2011, and that the
Sources: Standing Committee on Agriculture, Animal
Bill provides a statutory backing for such
Husbandry and Food Processing; PRS.
exemptions. The Committee accepted the
proposed amendment. ▪ Portability of farm equipment: Since farm
machinery is expensive, small farmers find it
▪ Power to enter premises: The Act empowers an difficult to purchase this equipment. The
authorised person to enter and inspect/survey/ Committee observed that the government has
demolish any coastal aquaculture land/enclosure, introduced custom hiring centres and farm
with a minimum 24-hour notice. The Bill waives machinery banks, where farmers can share
the notice requirement provided that the reasons be machines. So 17,727 farm machinery banks have
- 10-
Monthly Policy Review – July 2023 PRS Legislative Research
been established. A well-established centre These include disclosures related to: (i) ESG
provides mechanisation to about 100-200 farmers. ratings and their types on a website, (ii) the
The Committee noted that farm machinery banks methodology for providing ESG ratings, (iii) any
have been established in almost all states. changes in ESG rating methodology, and (iv) the
However, their benefits have not percolated to the general nature of compensation arrangements with
district, taluka, panchayat, and gram sabha levels. clients. In addition, they must identify, disclose,
It recommended that the government widely and avoid/mitigate (to the extent feasible) potential
publicise such schemes and develop an app to conflicts of interest.
locate and contact nearby centres/banks.
▪ Review of ESG rating: The rating provider should
For a PRS summary of the Report, see here. review each of the published ESG ratings annually.
This can be done more frequently, if required. An
ESG rating must not be withdrawn unless the
issuer (whose security is rated) is wound up,
Finance merged, or amalgamated with another company.
Tushar Chakrabarty (tushar@prsindia.org)
SEBI issues consultation paper on
cybersecurity and cyber resilience framework
SEBI releases a consultation paper on FPI
investment in corporate bonds The Securities and Exchange Board of India (SEBI)
released a consultation paper on the consolidated
The Securities and Exchange Board of India (SEBI)
cybersecurity and cyber resilience framework for SEBI
issued a consultation paper on investment by foreign regulated entities.53 These entities include brokers,
portfolio investors (FPI) in corporate bonds.50 SEBI
mutual funds, and stock exchanges. The paper noted
noted that secondary market (for buying and selling of
that use of information technology has rapidly grown
existing securities) transactions in corporate bonds
and is critical for SEBI regulated entities. At the same
mainly occur offline. This involves price negotiation
time, the protection of IT infrastructure and data has
on a bilateral basis. The paper proposes mandating
become a key concern. The framework has been
FPIs to undertake at least 10% of their secondary
drafted to strengthen the mechanism to deal with cyber
market trades in corporate bond through the request for
threats and incidents. Key features of the cybersecurity
quote (RFQ) platform. The mandate is proposed to be
and cyber resilience framework include:
implemented quarterly. The RFQ platform is a
centralised online trading platform. It helps in price ▪ Identification of assets: The regulated entities
discovery and provides transparency in transactions. must identify and classify critical assets. These
assets should be based on: (i) their sensitivity and
SEBI releases framework for regulation of criticality for business operations, (ii) services, and
(iii) data management.
ESG rating providers
▪ Protection of cyber infrastructure: Regulated
The Securities and Exchange Board of India (SEBI)
entities will have to implement network
notified the SEBI (Credit Rating Agencies)
segmentation techniques (dividing the network in
(Amendment) Regulations, 2023.51 It amends the SEBI
multiple segments to control the flow of traffic).
(Credit Rating Agencies) Regulations, 1999.52 These
This would restrict access to sensitive information
provide for the regulation of credit rating agencies.
and services. An auditor, empanelled by CERT-In
Such agencies provide ratings to securities which are
(Indian Computer Emergency Response Team),
proposed to be listed or already listed on stock
shall conduct a periodic audit of compliance to
exchanges. The 2023 amendment provides a
standards prescribed under the framework.
framework for agencies providing environmental,
social, and governance (ESG) ratings. These ratings ▪ Detection of cyber threats: Regulated entities
offer opinions about the profile of governance risk, shall establish appropriate security mechanisms
social risk, or climatic risks related to a company or its through a security operation centre. It would
securities. Key features include: monitor security events and ensure timely
detection of anomalous activities. The functional
▪ Registration: ESG rating providers must register
efficiency of the centre must be measured every six
with SEBI. For SEBI to grant a registration
months. All regulated entities must formulate an
certificate, certain conditions must be fulfilled.
up-to-date cyber crisis management plan.
The applicant must: (i) be incorporated as a
company under the Companies Act, 2013, (ii) have
RBI issues draft circular for issuance of debit,
ESG rating as its main activity, and (iii) submit
credit, and prepaid cards
their business plan to SEBI.
▪ Responsibilities of the agencies: The ESG rating The Reserve Bank of India (RBI) has released a draft
provider has to take certain steps to ensure circular on arrangements by card issuers with card
transparency and prevent a conflict of interest. networks for issuing debit, credit, and prepaid cards.54
- 11-
Monthly Policy Review – July 2023 PRS Legislative Research
Authorised card networks tie-up with banks and non- Guarantee scheme for corporate debt notified
banks (card issuers) for issuance of debit, credit, and
The Ministry of Finance notified the Guarantee Scheme
prepaid cards. Authorised card networks include
for Corporate Debt.58 The scheme will provide a
MasterCard, Visa, Rupay, and American Express. The
guarantee cover against debt raised/to be raised by the
choice of a card network is decided by the card issuer.
Corporate Debt Market Development Fund. The Fund
RBI observed that existing arrangements between card
will be under Securities and Exchange Board of India
networks and card issuers are not conducive to
(SEBI) regulations. In normal times, it will invest in
providing choices to customers. RBI has proposed
liquid, low risk debt instruments. In periods of market
that: (i) card issuers shall not enter into any
dislocation, the Fund will invest in eligible corporate
arrangements with card networks, restraining them
debt securities. Market dislocation refers to stress in
from issuing the services of other card networks, (ii)
the financial sector which will be determined by SEBI
card issuers must issue cards across multiple card
according to a prescribed framework. The guarantee
networks, and (iii) eligible customers should have the
cover shall not exceed Rs 30,000 crore. The scheme
choice to choose from the multiple card networks.
will be implemented for a 15-year period which can be
Issuing cards across multiple networks and providing
extended by the Department of Economic Affairs.
the option to choose to the customer will be effective
Debt-oriented mutual funds (which pool money to
from October 1, 2023.
invest in debt instruments) shall contribute 25 basis
Comments are invited by August 4, 2023.55 points of their assets under management (AUM) to the
Fund. They will also provide additional contributions
RBI releases report on internationalisation of with increase in their AUM. Existing/new asset
rupee management companies of specified debt-oriented
mutual funds shall make a one-time contribution
The Reserve Bank of India (RBI) released a report of
towards the Fund.
the inter-departmental group on the internationalisation
of the rupee.56,57 The report noted that due to recent
Standing Committee submits report on cyber
geopolitical developments, the use of currencies such
security
as the rupee for international trade could be explored.
Key recommendations include: The Standing Committee on Finance (Chair: Mr. Jayant
Sinha) submitted its report on ‘Cyber Security and
▪ Standardised approach for trade agreements:
Rising Incidence of Cyber/White Collar Crimes’ on
The report noted that RBI has been receiving
July 27, 2023.59 Key observations and
proposals from various jurisdictions for trade
recommendations of the Committee include:
arrangements in local currencies. It recommended
adopting a uniform template for examining ▪ Cyber Protection Authority: The Committee
proposals involving multilateral/bilateral trade noted that the current regulatory landscape for
agreements. Such agreements may entail cyber security involves multiple agencies and
invoicing, settlement, and payment in rupees and bodies. This requires a high level of inter-
the local currencies of counterpart countries. ministerial coordination. There is no central
authority or agency solely dedicated to cyber
▪ Opening rupee accounts by non-residents: The
security. The Committee recommended
report observed that the ability to open accounts
establishing a centralised Cyber Protection
outside the country of the currency is important for
Authority (CPA). The authority would develop
its internationalisation. It recommended that non-
and implement robust cyber security policies,
residents may initially be allowed to open rupee
guidelines, and best practices in collaboration with
accounts with overseas branches of authorised
states and private sector entities.
dealers. Such dealers are authorised by RBI to
deal in foreign exchange. Later, non-residents may ▪ Sharing data: Expanding digital landscapes along
be allowed to open a rupee account with any with the presence of search engines and big tech
overseas bank. companies has increased the vulnerability of digital
ecosystems to cybercrime. This requires a clear
▪ Use of RTGS for international transactions:
delineation of responsibilities for search engines
Real Time Gross Settlement (RTGS) provides for
and global tech companies. The Committee
interbank funds transfer without any limit on the
recommended that application stores should be
amount of funds. The report recommended that
mandated to share exhaustive metadata and
the use of RTGS for international transactions may
information on all applications that they host on
be explored. It also recommended expanding the
their platform. This data repository will empower
use of UPI for cross-border settlements.
regulators to identify potential security
vulnerabilities and take needed measures. In
addition, tech companies should: (i) regularly
update and patch their operating systems and (ii)
enforce a stringent vetting process for approvals
- 12-
Monthly Policy Review – July 2023 PRS Legislative Research
within their application stores. guiding principles for the development of
brownfield airports. The Committee noted the
▪ Regulation of service providers: The Committee
need to formulate a policy that specifies
noted that there have been challenges in exerting
parameters for deciding whether to develop a
sufficient control over third-party service providers
greenfield or brownfield airport.
on cyber security matters. It recommended
enhancing regulatory powers to oversee and ▪ Coordination challenges and project delays: The
control such service providers including big tech Committee observed that the Ministry faces several
and telecom companies. It also noted that big tech challenges in coordinating with state governments
companies should consider inputs from regulators for establishing airports. These delays include
such as the Reserve Bank of India (RBI) to make land acquisition and allotment, as well as delays in
their systems more secure. submitting in-principle approvals where the central
government has already provided site clearance.
For a PRS summary of the report, see here.
For instance, while 13 greenfield airports have
received in-principle approval, four were
operationalised after 10 years, and one was
operationalised after 20 years. Delays are also
Civil Aviation
caused due to rehabilitation and resettlement issues
that lead to various litigations.
National Civil Aviation Policy, 2016 amended
For a PRS Report Summary, please see here.
Tanvi Vipra (tanvi@prsindia.org)
The Ministry of Civil Aviation notified amendments to
the National Civil Aviation Policy, 2016.60 The Policy External Affairs
provides for the upgrade and modernisation of air
navigation services.61 Arpita Mallick (arpita@prsindia.org)
As per the Policy, all Indian registered aircrafts from
Standing Committee Report on India’s
January 1, 2019 onwards must be enabled with GPS
Neighbourhood First Policy
Aided GEO Augmented Navigation (GAGAN).
GAGAN uses ground stations to augment the The Standing Committee on External Affairs (Chair:
navigation system.62 The amendment exempts two Mr. P.P. Chaudhary) submitted its report on ‘India’s
categories of aircrafts from having GAGAN. These Neighbourhood First Policy”.64 The concept of the
include aircrafts that cannot be made GAGAN Neighbourhood First Policy was introduced in 2008. It
compliant due to technology challenges, and aircrafts was conceived to bolster relations with certain priority
that have been manufactured prior to July 1, 2021. countries such as Afghanistan, Bangladesh, Maldives,
Myanmar, Nepal, Pakistan and Sri Lanka. Key
Standing Committee submits report on the observations and recommendations include:
development of airports
▪ Terrorism and Illegal Migration: The
Priyadarshini Jain (priyadarshini@prsindia.org) Committee noted that over the last three decades
India has faced threats, tension, and possibility of
The Standing Committee on Transport, Tourism and terrorist and militant attacks from its immediate
Culture (Chair: Mr. V. Vijayasai Reddy) submitted its neighbourhood. Challenges of illegal migration
report on ‘Development of Greenfield and Brownfield and smuggling of weapons and drugs require
Airports and Issues pertaining to Civil Enclaves in improved security infrastructure at borders. The
Defence Airports,’.63 Greenfield airports are developed Committee recommended the monitoring of
on empty/ undeveloped land and their commissioning demographic changes caused by illegal migration
is done from scratch. Brownfield airports have existing at border areas. The Ministry of External Affairs
infrastructure for airport development such as runways should work in close coordination with the
and terminal buildings. Key observations and Ministry of Home Affairs and state governments to
recommendations of the Committee include: address illegal migration.
▪ Comprehensive policy for brownfield airports: ▪ Relations with China and Pakistan: India’s
The Committee observed it is necessary to revamp, bilateral relations with China and Pakistan have
expand, and modernise brownfield airports. been plagued by contentious issues. Terrorism
However, they face constraints in terms of site emanating from Pakistan is a core concern. The
expansion, design limitations, and execution risks. Committee recommended engaging with regional
While there is no specific policy for brownfield and multilateral organisations to sensitise them of
airports, the Ministry of Civil Aviation highlighted the role of Pakistan in fostering terrorism. Efforts
that the National Civil Aviation Policy, 2016, and should be made to establish a common platform
the Airports Authority of India Act, 1994 contain for countering terrorism under the Neighbourhood
- 13-
Monthly Policy Review – July 2023 PRS Legislative Research
First Policy. It also recommended the government that the government formulate fixed guidelines on
to establish economic ties with Pakistan. the election and tenure of the Chairman/President,
as well as the constitution and operation of the
▪ Investment in border infrastructure: The
Governing Council. It also recommended the
Committee noted the deficiency in India’s border
inclusion of a Member of Parliament on the
infrastructure and the need to stabilise and develop
Governing Councils of each of the Institutions.
border regions. For engagement with India’s
neighbours, connectivity infrastructure such as For a PRS Summary of the report, see here.
cross-border roads, railways, and inland waterways
and ports needs an improvement. It recommended
exploring the feasibility of setting up a regional
development fund for connectivity infrastructure Power
under regional frameworks.
Electricity (Amendment) Rules, 2023 notified
Pratinav Damani (pratinav@prsindia.org)
Culture
The Ministry of Power notified the Electricity
Rutvik Upadhyaya (rutvik@prsindia.org) (Amendment) Rules, 2023.66 They amend the
Electricity Rules, 2005 made under the Electricity Act,
Standing Committee submits report on the 2003.67,68 The Act regulates licenses and tariffs for
functioning of National Akademis power. Key changes in the Rules include:
The Standing Committee on Transport, Tourism, and ▪ Qualification criteria for captive generators:
Culture (Chair: Mr. V. Vijaysai Reddy) submitted its Under the Rules, a power plant may qualify to be a
report on the ‘Functioning of National Akademis and captive generation plant if the captive user owns at
Other Cultural Institutions’.65 National Akademis are least 26% of the generation plant. A captive
autonomous bodies instituted to promote various art generation plant means a power plant set up for
forms and culture. They operate under the one’s own use. The Amendment adds that, in
administrative supervision of the Ministry of Culture cases where the plant is established by a captive
They are: (i) Sangeet Natak Akademi, (ii) Sahitya user’s affiliate company, the captive user must own
Aakdemi, (iii) Lalit Kala Akademi, (iv) The National at least 51% of that company. Further, a
School of Drama, (v) Centre for Cultural Resources subsidiary company of an existing captive user will
and Training, (vi) The Indira Gandhi National Centre also be considered a captive user.
for the Arts, and (vii) Kalakshetra Foundation. Key
▪ Validity of licenses: Under the Act, central or
observations and recommendations include:
state commissions may grant licenses to transmit,
▪ Budgetary Allocation and Issues: The distribute or trade electricity. Entities such as
Committee observed that the Ministry of Culture central or state transmission utilities and
has been allocated Rs 3,400 crore for 2023-24, government companies are considered deemed
which is only 0.075% of the total Union budget. It licensees. The Amendment specifies that: (i)
observed that this was below the global allocation validity of licenses in the first category will be
of 2% to 5% for cultural ministeries. Moreover, specified in the license itself and (ii) deemed
the Committee noted that the combined budgetary licenses will be valid for 25 years. Other licenses
allocation in 2023-24 towards all eight National will be valid and renewed as per the existing
Akademis at Rs 401 crore was inadequate. It agreements. Deemed licenses will be
recommended an increase in the budgetary automatically renewed for another 25 years after
allocation to the National Akademis and other expiry, unless revoked. The renewal period may
cultural institutions to increase their efficiency and be lower if requested by the licensee. These rules
outreach. It also recommended Akademis to do not apply to transmission developers selected
explore the option of channelling CSR funds and through tariff-based bidding.
private partnership for donations and grants.
▪ Uniform RE Tariff: Under the Rules, renewable
Further, it recommended undertaking fundraising
energy (RE) tariff is calculated on the basis of the
events, galas and exploring the revenue potential
69
actual energy supplied to the discom. The
of OTT platforms.
Amendment changes the basis of tariff calculation
▪ Election and Tenure of Heads: The Committee from energy supplied to energy scheduled. Also,
observed that the process of appointing the the RE tariff will be set by the intermediary
Chairman/President of National Akademis and the between the discom and the generation company
tenure of these officeholders varies across National (genco). Earlier it was set by an implementing
Akademis. The composition of the Governing agency notified by the central government. RE
Council of each Akademi is also different. To tariff was earlier applicable only to RE gencos.
address this issue, the Committee recommended The Amendment specifies that RE tariff will only
- 14-
Monthly Policy Review – July 2023 PRS Legislative Research
be applicable to discoms and open access Animal Welfare
providers. Further, changes in fuel costs will be
included to calculate fuel and power purchase Tanvi Vipra (tanvi@prsindia.org)
adjustment surcharge.
Draft Rules to prevent animal cruelty released
White paper on the introduction of Distributed
The Ministry of Fisheries, Animal Husbandry and
System Operators released
Dairying has invited comments on the Draft Society for
Arpita Mallick (arpita@prsindia.org) Prevention of Cruelty to Animals Rules, 2023.71 The
Draft Rules have been framed under the Prevention of
The Department of Science and Technology released a Cruelty to Animals Act, 1960.72 The Draft Rules seek
white paper on the introduction of Distribution System to supersede the Prevention of Cruelty to Animals
Operators (DSO) in the power sector.70 The paper (Establishment and Regulation of Societies for
observed that the adoption of distributed energy Prevention of Cruelty to Animals) Rules, 2001.73 The
resources such as rooftop solar panels, wind farms, and 2001 Rules require state governments to form Societies
electric vehicles is crucial for the transition to cleaner for Prevention of Cruelty to Animals (SPCAs) in each
sources of energy. However, integrating them presents district. Key features of the Draft Rules are as follows:
new challenges for managing the grid due to increased
▪ Functions of SPCAs: As per the 2001 Rules,
uncertainty in generation and load patterns. With
SPCAs would carry out functions such as aiding
rooftop solar panels, many consumers can also act as
the government, Animal Welfare Board of India,
producers and inject electricity into the grid.
and local authorities in enforcing provisions of the
With these changes, the distribution system needs to be Act. In addition to these functions, the Draft Rules
transformed with a two-way flow of information specify that SPCAs must also: (i) establish a 24x7
between operators and consumers, and increased helpline number for receiving reports on cruelty to
automation. The paper observed the need to introduce animals, (ii) operate an ambulance service for sick,
an entity called Distribution System Operator to injured, or diseased homeless animals, and (iii) aid
manage these concerns for the distribution system. and assist the implementation of animal birth
Key observations and recommendations are as follows: control programmes in the district.
▪ Functions of DSOs: Functions of DSOs may ▪ Management Committees of SPCAs: The 2001
include: (i) forecasting of distributed energy Rules specify that the state government or the
resources as well as overall load, (ii) network district local authority is empowered to appoint the
planning, operation, and control, (iii) scheduling of Managing Committee of an SPCA. The Draft
supply, and (iv) billing and collection. The exact Rules specify that the Management Committee
functions will depend on the adopted regulatory must have 17 members (including the
framework. Currently, many of these functions are Chairperson). The Chairperson shall be the
performed by: (i) distribution utilities (discoms), Deputy Commissioner/District Magistrate/District
which purchase power from generators and supply Collector. Other members include regional officer
it to consumers, and (ii) State Load Despatch of the state pollution control board, representative
Centres (SDLCs) which schedule and despatch of the district forest department, district
supply from generators, and are responsible for prosecution officer, four members representing
integrated operation of the grid. animal welfare organisations, and three eminent
persons engaged in animal welfare. One member
▪ With the wider adoption of distributed energy
in districts with international borders will be
resources, peer-to-peer and localised electricity
nominated from para-military forces or border
markets may flourish. DSOs could also facilitate
security forces.
such markets.
▪ Infirmaries: As per the 2001 Rules, SPCAs shall
▪ Approaches to introducing DSOs: The paper
construct infirmaries and animal shelters which
observed that DSOs may be introduced as: (i) a
must have a full-time veterinary doctor and an
separate entity, or (ii) entrusting discoms or area-
administrator. The Draft Rules specify that
level load despatch centres with the distribution
infirmaries must have sheds for large animals,
system operation functions. It observed that the
kennels, and aviaries. They must also have
introduction of DSOs should be possible without
enclosures for injured/diseased animals.
segregating network and supply businesses in the
distribution segment. Currently, a single entity Comments are invited until August 14, 2023.
owns the distribution network and business of
supply to consumers.
- 15-
Monthly Policy Review – July 2023 PRS Legislative Research
Science and Technology ▪ Intellectual Property (IP) Rights: In order to
strengthen India’s IP regime, the policy aims to: (i)
Arpita Mallick (arpita@prsindia.org) establish a single window platform for a unified IP
framework, (ii) strengthen cross border IP
Draft National Deep Tech Startup Policy, 2023 protection, and (iii) streamline the patent
released application process.
The Draft National Deep Tech Startup Policy, 2023 ▪ Funding: The draft policy noted that it is
was released by the Office of Principal Scientific necessary to facilitate targeted long-term funding
Advisor. 74 A deep tech startup uses early-stage of deep tech startups. It aims to: (i) create a
technologies which are yet to be developed for platform to capture the lifecycle of government
commercial applications. It involves extended grant payments, (ii) direct corporate social
development timelines and is highly capital intensive. responsibility funds to science-based research
Key features of the policy include: institutions, (iii) create a fund of funds dedicated to
deep tech investments, and (iv) use Technology
▪ Research and Development: The policy proposes
Impact Bonds to get investments from public and
to increase the expenditure on research and
philanthropic entities.
development. It also seeks to enhance technology
commercialisation by creating: (i) partnerships ▪ Free trade agreements: The policy aims to enable
between academic institutions and industry, and Indian deep tech startups to penetrate global
(ii) guidelines for commercialisation of publicly markets by their inclusion in free trade agreements.
funded research. For strategic sectors, deep tech It also proposes to mitigate import dependencies
startups have restricted access to test sites for and supply chain vulnerabilities for raw materials
demonstration and testing. For these sectors, the used by deep tech startups.
policy proposes to create a network of
standardised, field test and experimentation sites.
1 “Consumer Price Index Numbers on Base 2012=100 for Rural, 12 Report of the Joint Committee on the Jan Vishwas (Amendment of
Urban and Combined for the Month of June 2023”, Press Information Provisions) Bill, 2022, Lok Sabha, March 17, 2023,
Bureau, Ministry of Statistics and Programme Implementation, July https://prsindia.org/files/bills_acts/bills_parliament/2022/Joint_Com
12, 2023, https://pib.gov.in/PressReleasePage.aspx?PRID=1938980. mittee_on_the_Jan_Vishwas_(Amendment_of_Provisions)_Bill_202
2 “Wholesale Price Index for June, 2023 (provisional) stands at (-) 2.pdf.
4.12% against (-) 3.48% recorded in May, 2023”, Press Information 13 The Registration of Births and Deaths (Amendment) Bill, 2023,
Bureau, Ministry of Commerce and Industry, July 14, 2023, https://sansad.in/getFile/BillsTexts/LSBillTexts/Asintroduced/93_20
https://pib.gov.in/PressReleasePage.aspx?PRID=1939393. 23_LS_ENG726202314647PM.pdf?source=legislation.
3 The Cinematograph (Amendment) Bill, 2023, Ministry of 14 The Registration of Births and Deaths Act, 1960,
Information and Broadcasting, July 20, 2023, https://www.indiacode.nic.in/bitstream/123456789/11674/1/the_regis
https://prsindia.org/files/bills_acts/bills_parliament/2023/Cinematogr tration_of_births_and_deaths_act%2C_1969.pdf.
aphy_Bill_2023.pdf. 15 The Jammu and Kashmir Reorganisation (Amendment) Bill, 2023,
4 The Cinematograph Act, 1952, March 21, 1952, https://sansad.in/getFile/BillsTexts/LSBillTexts/Asintroduced/100_2
https://www.indiacode.nic.in/bitstream/123456789/2170/1/AAcinem 023_LS_ENG726202312419PM.pdf?source=legislation.
a1952___37.pdf#search=Cinematograph. 16 The Jammu and Kashmir Reorganisation Act, 2019,
5 Forest Conservation Act, 1980, https://www.indiacode.nic.in/bitstream/123456789/12030/1/A2019-
https://prsindia.org/files/bills_acts/bills_parliament/2005/bill53_2007 34.pdf.
010153_Handbook_of_Forest_Conservation_Act_1980_and_Forest_ 17 The Representation of the People Act, 1950,
Conservation_Rules_2003.pdf. https://www.indiacode.nic.in/bitstream/123456789/1663/1/A1950-
6 Forest (Conservation) Amendment Bill, 2023, 43.pdf.
https://prsindia.org/files/bills_acts/bills_parliament/2023/Forest%20( 18 “Ministry of Home Affairs launches “Scheme for Expansion and
Conservation)%20Amendment%20Bill,%202023.pdf. Modernisation of Fire Services in the States” with a total outlay of Rs
7 Report of the Joint Committee on the Forest (Conservation) 5,000 crore”, Press Information Bureau, Ministry of Home Affairs,
Amendment Bill, 2023, July 20, 2023, July 5, 2023,
https://prsindia.org/files/bills_acts/bills_parliament/2023/Joint_Com https://www.pib.gov.in/PressReleasePage.aspx?PRID=1937594.
mittee_Report_on_the_Forest_(Conservation)_Amendment_Bill_202 19 The Repealing and Amending Bill 2022,
3.pdf. http://164.100.47.4/BillsTexts/LSBillTexts/Asintroduced/290_2022_
8 The Biological Diversity (Amendment) Bill, 2021 as passed by Lok LS_Eng1219202255443PM.pdf.
Sabha, 20 The Factoring Regulation Act, 2011,,
https://prsindia.org/files/bills_acts/bills_parliament/2021/Biological% https://www.indiacode.nic.in/bitstream/123456789/2116/1/AA2012_
20Diversity%20bill%20as%20passed%20by%20LS.pdf. _12.pdf.
9 The Biological Diversity (Amendment) Bill, 2021 as introduced in 21 The Mines and Minerals (Development and Regulation)
Lok Sabha, Amendment Bill, 2023, Ministry of Coal and Mines, July 20, 2023,
https://prsindia.org/files/bills_acts/bills_parliament/2021/Biological% https://sansad.in/getFile/BillsTexts/LSBillTexts/Asintroduced/101_2
20Diversity%20(Amendment)%20Bill,%202021.pdf. 023_LS_ENG726202312622PM.pdf?source=legislation.
10 The Biological Diversity Act, 2002 22 The Mines and Minerals (Development and Regulation) Act, 1957,
https://www.indiacode.nic.in/bitstream/123456789/2046/1/200318.pd December 28, 1957,
f. https://www.indiacode.nic.in/bitstream/123456789/1421/1/a1957-
11 The Jan Vishwas (Amendment of Provisions) Bill, 2023, Lok 67.pdf.
Sabha, https://sansad.in/ls/legislation/bills.
- 16-
Monthly Policy Review – July 2023 PRS Legislative Research
43 The Constitution (Jammu and Kashmir) Scheduled Tribes Order,
1989,
23 The Offshore Areas Mineral (Development and Regulation)
https://cdnbbsr.s3waas.gov.in/s380537a945c7aaa788ccfcdf1b99b5d8
Amendment Bill, 2023, Ministry of Coal and Mines, July 19, 2023,
f/uploads/2023/01/2023010570.pdf.
https://sansad.in/getFile/BillsTexts/LSBillTexts/Asintroduced/102_2
023_LS_ENG727202321507PM.pdf?source=legislation. 44 The Constitution (Jammu and Kashmir) Scheduled Castes Order,
1956,
24 The Offshore Areas Mineral (Development and Regulation) Act,
https://lddashboard.legislative.gov.in/sites/default/files/15_The%20C
2002, January 30, 2003,
onstitution%20%28JK%29%20SC%20Order%201956.pdf.
https://www.indiacode.nic.in/bitstream/123456789/2040/1/200317.pd
f.
25 The National Nursing and Midwifery Commission Bill, 2023, 45 Report No. 39: The Inter-Services Organisations (Command,
https://sansad.in/getFile/BillsTexts/LSBillTexts/Asintroduced/83_20 Control and Discipline) Bill, 2023, Standing Committee on Defence,
23_LS_ENG724202314708PM.pdf?source=legislation. Lok Sabha, July 21, 2023,
https://sansad.in/ls/committee/departmentally-related-standing-
26 The Indian Nursing Council Act, 1947,
committees/7-defence-
https://www.indiacode.nic.in/bitstream/123456789/1785/1/194748.pd
nameH=%E0%A4%B0%E0%A4%95%E0%A5%8D%E0%A4%B7
f.
%E0%A4%BE.
27 The National Dental Commission Bill, 2023, Ministry of Health
46 Report No. 57, Standing Committee on Agriculture, Animal
and Family Welfare (MoHFW), July 24, 2023,
Husbandry and Food Processing: ‘The Coastal Aquaculture
https://sansad.in/getFile/BillsTexts/LSBillTexts/Asintroduced/82_20
Authority(Amendment) Bill, 2023, Lok Sabha, July 21, 2023,
23_LS_ENG724202314738PM.pdf?source=legislation
https://sansad.in/getFile/lsscommittee/Agriculture,%20Animal%20H
28 ‘Ethical Conduct of Controlled Human Infection Studies (CHIS)’, usbandry%20and%20Food%20Processing/17_Agriculture_Animal_
Indian Council of Medical Research, July 16, 2023, Husbandry_and_Food_Processing_57.pdf?source=loksabhadocs.
https://main.icmr.nic.in/sites/default/files/upload_documents/CHIS_
47 The Coastal Aquaculture Authority (Amendment) Bill, 2023,
Guidance.pdf.
Ministry of Fisheries, Animal Husbandry and Dairying, April 5,
29 The Multi-State Co-operative Societies (Amendment) Bill, 2022, 2023,
https://sansad.in/getFile/BillsTexts/LSBillTexts/PassedLoksabha/215 https://sansad.in/getFile/BillsTexts/LSBillTexts/Asintroduced/81_20
-C_2022_LS_Eng7262023110825AM.pdf?source=legislation. 23_LS_ENG45202321701PM.pdf?source=legislation.
30 The Multi-State Co-operative Societies Act, 2002, 48 The Coastal Aquaculture Authority Act, 2005, June 23, 2005,
https://mscs.dac.gov.in/Guidelines/GuidelineAct2002.pdf. https://www.indiacode.nic.in/bitstream/123456789/2068/1/200524.pd
31 Indian Institutes of Management (Amendment) Bill, 2023, Ministry f.
of Education, July 28, 2023, 49 Report No. 58, ‘Research and Development in Farm Mechanisation
https://sansad.in/getFile/BillsTexts/LSBillTexts/Asintroduced/109_2 for Small and Marginal Farmers in the Country’, Standing
023_LS_ENG7282023122037PM.pdf?source=legislation. Committee on Agriculture, Animal Husbandry and Food Processing,
32UGC (Minimum Qualifications for Appointment of Teachers and Lok Sabha, July 21, 2023.
other Academic Staff in Universities and Colleges and other 50 Consultation Paper on mandating FPIs to route a specific
Measures for the Maintenance of Standards in Higher Education) percentage of certain transactions in secondary market trades through
(2nd Amendment) Regulations, 2023’, University Grants Request for Quote (RFQ) platform of stock exchanges, Securities and
Commission, July 01, 2023, Exchange Board of India, July 5, 2023,
https://www.ugc.gov.in/pdfnews/5751331_UGC-Regulations- https://www.sebi.gov.in/reports-and-statistics/reports/jul-
Minimum-Qualifications-2023.pdf. 2023/consultation-paper-on-mandating-fpis-to-route-a-specific-
33 UGC Regulations On Minimum Qualifications for Appointment of percentage-of-certain-transactions-in-secondary-market-trades-
Teachers and other Academic Staff in Universities and Colleges and through-request-for-quote-rfq-platform-of-stock-
Measures for the Maintenance of Standards in Higher Education, exchanges_73525.html.
2018, University Grants Commission, July 19, 2018, 51 Securities and Exchange Board of India (Credit Rating Agencies)
https://www.ugc.gov.in/pdfnews/4033931_UGC- (Amendment) Regulations, 2023, Securities and Exchange Board of
Regulation_min_Qualification_Jul2018.pdf India, July 5, 2023, https://www.sebi.gov.in/legal/regulations/jul-
34 University Grants Commission(UGC)-NET 2023/securities-and-exchange-board-of-india-credit-rating-agencies-
https://ugcnet.nta.nic.in/. amendment-regulations-2023_73451.html.
35 Maharashtra State Eligibility Test (MH-SET) for Assistant 52 Securities and Exchange Board of India (Credit Rating Agencies)
Professor, https://setexam.unipune.ac.in/ Regulations, 1999, Securities and Exchange Board of India,
36 ‘Guidelines on Sustainable and Vibrant University-Industry https://www.sebi.gov.in/legal/regulations/jan-2023/securities-and-
Linkage System for Indian Universities’, University Grants exchange-board-of-india-credit-rating-agencies-regulations-1999-
Commission, July 13th 2023, last-amended-on-january-17-2023-_68140.html.
https://www.ugc.gov.in/pdfnews/5357558_Guidelines-on-A- 53 Consultation Paper on Consolidated Cybersecurity and Cyber
Sustainable-and-Vibrant-University-Industry-Linkage-System-for- Resilience Framework (CSCRF) for SEBI Regulated Entities,
Indian-Universities.pdf. Securities and Exchange Board of India, July 4, 2023,
37 The Constitution (Scheduled Tribes) Order (Third Amendment) https://www.sebi.gov.in/reports-and-statistics/reports/jul-
Bill, 2022 2023/consultation-paper-on-consolidated-cybersecurity-and-cyber-
38 The Constitution (Scheduled Tribes) Order (Third Amendment) resilience-framework-cscrf-for-sebi-regulated-entities_73442.html.
Bill, 2022 54 Draft Circular - Arrangements with Card Networks for issue of
39 The Constitution (Scheduled Tribes) Order, 1950, Debit, Credit and Prepaid Cards, Reserve Bank of India, July 5, 2023,
https://rbidocs.rbi.org.in/rdocs/Content/PDFs/DRAFTCIRCULARD
https://lddashboard.legislative.gov.in/sites/default/files/19_The%20C
EBITCREDITPREPAIDCARDS1F22D73A6EB24CF9B9C83B0401
onstitution%20%28ST%29%20Order%201950.pdf.
6803E5.PDF.
40 The Constitution (Scheduled Tribes) Order (Amendment) Bill,
55 RBI invites comments on draft circular on Arrangements with Card
2023,
Networks for issue of Debit, Credit and Prepaid Cards, Reserve Bank
41 The Constitution (Jammu and Kashmir) Scheduled Tribes Order
of India, July 5, 2023,
Amendment Bill, 2023,
https://rbidocs.rbi.org.in/rdocs/PressRelease/PDFs/PR543DRAFTCI
https://sansad.in/getFile/BillsTexts/LSBillTexts/Asintroduced/92_20
RCULAR97A483FA92EF4ADE887CD80F8B878C18.PDF.
23_LS_ENG726202314630PM.pdf?source=legislation.
56 Report of Inter Departmental Group on Internationalisation of INR,
42 The Constitution (Jammu and Kashmir) Scheduled Castes Order
Reserve Bank of India, October 2022,
Amendment Bill, 2023,
https://sansad.in/getFile/BillsTexts/LSBillTexts/Asintroduced/18_20
23_LS_ENG726202312513PM.pdf?source=legislation.
- 17-
Monthly Policy Review – July 2023 PRS Legislative Research
67 Electricity Rules, 2005, Ministry of Power, eGazette, June 8, 2005,
https://egazette.gov.in/WriteReadData/2005/E_248_2011_024.pdf.
https://rbidocs.rbi.org.in/rdocs//PublicationReport/Pdfs/RIDGINRD2
D459218BDC46AB9253DE553B256AC1.PDF. 68 The Electricity Act, 2003, IndiaCode, May 26, 2003,
https://www.indiacode.nic.in/bitstream/123456789/2058/1/a2003-
57 Report of the Inter-Departmental Group (IDG) on
36.pdf#search=Electricity%20Act.
internationalisation of INR, Reserve Bank of India, July 5, 2023,
https://rbidocs.rbi.org.in/rdocs/PressRelease/PDFs/PR539IDGINRE2 69 Electricity (Amendment) Rules, 2022, Ministry of Power,
D7309C29324A668D4CD91EE9CC2BC9.PDF. eGazette, December 29, 2022,
https://egazette.gov.in/WriteReadData/2022/241614.pdf.
58 G.S.R. 559(E), Ministry of Finance, July 26, 2023,
https://egazette.gov.in/WriteReadData/2023/247631.pdf. 70 Transforming the Indian Power Sector, Distribution System
Operators: Need, Frameworks, and Regulatory Considerations,
59 59th Report: Cyber Security and Rising Incidence of Cyber/White
Department of Science and Technology, July 2023,
Collar Crimes, Standing Committee on Finance, Lok Sabha, July, 27,
https://dst.gov.in/sites/default/files/DSO-White-Paper.pdf.
2023, https://sansad.in/ls/committee/departmentally-related-standing-
committees/12-finance- 71 CG-DL-E-24072023-247556, Draft Society for Prevention of
nameH=%E0%A4%B5%E0%A4%BF%E0%A4%A4%E0%A5%8D Cruelty to Animals Rules, 2023, Ministry of Fisheries, Animal
%E0%A4%A4. Husbandry and Dairying, July 14, 2023,
https://egazette.gov.in/WriteReadData/2023/247556.pdf.
60 F. No. AV-19032/5/2015-AAI-MOCA, Ministry of Civil Aviation,
July 11, 2023, 72 The Prevention of Cruelty to Animals Act, 1960,
https://egazette.gov.in/WriteReadData/2023/247246.pdf. https://www.indiacode.nic.in/bitstream/123456789/1547/1/A1960-
59.pdf.
61 National Civil Aviation Policy, 2006,
https://www.civilaviation.gov.in/sites/default/files/Final_NCAP_201 73 The Prevention of Cruelty to Animals (Establishment and
6_15-06-2016-2_1.pdf. Regulation of Societies for Prevention of Cruelty to Animals) Rules,
2001,
62 What is GAGAN?, Airports Authority of India, as accessed on July
https://thc.nic.in/Central%20Governmental%20Rules/Prevention%20
19, 2023, https://www.aai.aero/en/content/what-gagan.
of%20Cruelty%20to%20Animals%20(Establishment%20and%20Re
63 Report No. 350,‘Development of Greenfield and Brownfield gulation%20of%20Societies%20for%20Prevention%20of%20Cruelt
Airports and Issues pertaining to Civil Enclaves in Defence Airports’, y%20to%20Animals)%20Rules,%202001..pdf.
Standing Committee on Transport, Tourism and Culture . Rajya
74 Draft National Deep Tech Startup Policy, 2023,
Sabha, July 24, 2023,
https://psa.gov.in/CMS/web/sites/default/files/process/NDTSP.pdf
https://sansad.in/getFile/rsnew/Committee_site/Committee_File/Repo
rtFile/20/173/350_2023_7_11.pdf?source=rajyasabha DISCLAIMER: This document is being furnished to you for your
64 India’s Neighbourhood First Policy, Standing Committee Report, information. You may choose to reproduce or redistribute this
2023, https://sansad.in/getFile/lsscommittee/External report for non-commercial purposes in part or in full to any other
Affairs/17_External_Affairs_22.pdf?source=loksabhadocs. person with due acknowledgement of PRS Legislative Research
65 Report No. 351, ‘Functioning of National Akademis and Other (“PRS”). The opinions expressed herein are entirely those of the
Cultural Institutions’, Standing Committee on Transport, Tourism, author(s). PRS makes every effort to use reliable and
and Culture, Rajya Sabha, July 24, 2023, comprehensive information, but PRS does not represent that the
https://sansad.in/getFile/rsnew/Committee_site/Committee_File/Repo contents of the report are accurate or complete. PRS is an
rtFile/20/173/351_2023_7_12.pdf?source=rajyasabha. independent, not-for-profit group. This document has been
prepared without regard to the objectives or opinions of those who
66 Electricity (Amendment) Rules, 2023, Ministry of Power,
may receive it.
eGazette, June 30, 2023,
https://egazette.gov.in/WriteReadData/2023/246925.pdf.
- 18-
