AS INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA
Bill No. 200 of 2025
THE SECURITIES MARKETS CODE, 2025
———
ARRANGEMENT OF CLAUSES
———
CHAPTER I
PRELIMINARY
CLAUSES
1. Short title and commencement.
2. Definitions.
CHAPTER II
ESTABLISHMENT, MANAGEMENT AND ADMINISTRATION OF BOARD
3. Securities and Exchange Board of India.
4. Composition of Board.
5. Terms and conditions of service of Chairperson and Members of
Board.
6. Removal of Members from office.
7. Management of Board.
8. Meetings of Board.
9. Officers and employees of Board.
10. Vacancies, etc., not to invalidate proceedings of Board.
11. Powers and functions of Board.
CHAPTER III
INSPECTION, INVESTIGATION, ADJUDICATION AND INTERIM ORDER
12. Inspection.
13. Investigation.
14. General powers and obligations of Investigating Officer.
15. Search and seizure.
16. Bar on initiation of inspection or investigation.
17. Power of Board to designate adjudicating officer.
18. Power of adjudicating officer.
19. Factors for adjudication.
20. Final order by adjudicating officer.
21. Board to call for records.
22. Power of adjudicating officer or Board to rectify order.
23. Power of adjudicating officer to issue directions or warnings.
24. Person to cease and desist from committing contravention.
25. Power of disgorgement and restitution.
26. Settlement of administrative and civil proceedings.
27. Power of Board and adjudicating officer to pass interim order.
(ii)
CHAPTER IV
REGISTRATION OF INTERMEDIARIES AND OTHER PERSONS,
INVESTMENT SCHEMES AND RELATED MATTERS
CLAUSES
28. Registration of intermediaries, etc.
29. Surrender, suspension and cancellation of certificate of registration.
30. Registration of investors.
31. Board to delegate power of registration.
32. Investment schemes.
33. Pooled investment vehicles.
34. Intermediary.
35. Obligation of securities markets service provider, market participant, etc.
36. Governing norms of self-regulatory organisations.
CHAPTER V
REGISTRATION AND REGULATION OF MARKET
INFRASTRUCTURE INSTITUTION
37. Registration of market infrastructure institution.
38. Cancellation of registration or suspension of business.
39. Power of market infrastructure institution to make bye-laws.
40. Power of Board to direct bye-laws to be made or to make bye-laws.
41. Action for contravention of bye-laws.
42. Ownership norms of market infrastructure institution.
43. Annual report.
44. Power of Central Government to supersede.
CHAPTER VI
REGULATION OF CONTRACTS
45. Contracts to be illegal in certain circumstances.
46. Validity of contracts.
47. Contracts in contravention of bye-laws to be void.
48. Exemptions for certain contracts.
49. Derivatives in respect of commodity.
50. Non-transferable specific delivery contract, spot delivery contract and
transferable specific delivery contract.
51. Prohibition of performance of contracts without registration.
52. Manner of dealing in securities through market infrastructure
institution.
53. Rights of holder of securities to dividends and income in respect of
securities.
(iii)
CHAPTER VII
HOLDING OF SECURITIES
CLAUSES
54. Power of Board in respect of depository services.
55. Securities to be in dematerialised and fungible form.
56. Process of dematerialisation.
57. Depository to maintain a Register of beneficial owners.
58. Registration of transfer of security, etc.
59. Pledge or hypothecation of securities or other regulated instrument
held through depository.
60. Furnishing of information and records by depository and issuer.
61. Rights of registered owner and beneficial owner.
62. Rights and obligations of depository.
63. Bankers’ Books Evidence Act, 1891 to apply to depositories.
CHAPTER VIII
LISTING AND DELISTING OF SECURITIES
64. Public issue and listing of securities.
65. Listing and disclosure requirements.
66. Delisting of securities.
67. Refusal for listing or delisting of securities.
CHAPTER IX
NETTING AND SETTLEMENT
68. Netting and settlement.
69. Delivery arrangements of contracts in securities.
70. Right of a clearing corporation shall have precedence over other right
and attachments.
CHAPTER X
INVESTOR CHARTER AND INVESTOR GRIEVANCE REDRESSAL MECHANISMS
71. Investor charter.
72. Investor grievance redressal mechanism.
73. Board to designate Ombudsperson to redress grievances.
74. Procedure for filing of grievance and complaint.
75. Order of Ombudsperson.
76. Ombudsperson to inform Board regarding contravention of Code.
77. Ombudsperson to have certain powers of civil court.
78. Orders of Ombudsperson not to bar Board from taking any action.
CHAPTER XI
SECURITIES APPELLATE TRIBUNAL
79. Securities Appellate Tribunal.
80. Composition of Tribunal and its Benches.
(iv)
CLAUSES
81. Appointment, qualifications, terms and conditions of service of
Presiding Officer and Members.
82. Filling up of vacancies.
83. Senior-most Judicial Member to act as Presiding Officer in certain
circumstances.
84. Officers and employees of Tribunal.
85. Appeal to Tribunal.
86. Procedure and powers of Tribunal.
87. Order constituting Tribunal to be final and not to invalidate its
proceedings.
88. Right to legal representation.
89. Limitation.
90. Presiding Officer, Members and staff of Tribunal to be public servants.
91. Appeal to Supreme Court.
CHAPTER XII
PROHIBITION OF FRAUDULENT OR UNFAIR PRACTICES AND MARKET ABUSE
92. Prohibition of fraudulent or unfair practices.
93. Prohibition of market abuse.
CHAPTER XIII
OFFENCES AND PENALTIES
94. Punishment for failure to comply orders.
95. Punishment for failure to comply with directions of Investigating
Officer.
96. Punishment for market abuse.
97. Penalty for failure to do certain acts.
98. Penalty for default by securities markets service provider.
99. Penalty for default by stock broker.
100. Penalty for failure to redress grievances of investors.
101. Penalty for failure to dematerialise certificate of securities.
102. Penalty for failure to reconcile records.
103. Penalty for other non-compliance of certain provisions.
104. Penalty for failure to conduct business in accordance with provisions
of Code.
105. Penalty for failure to furnish periodical returns, etc.
106. Penalty for failure to comply with orders of Ombudsperson.
107. Penalty for default by person managing pooled investment vehicle.
108. Penalty for excess dematerialisation or delivery of unlisted securities.
109. Penalty where no specific provision for penalty is provided.
110. Contravention by companies.
(v)
CLAUSES
111. Factors to be considered by adjudicating officer for imposition of
penalty.
112. Penalty to be credited to Consolidated Fund of India.
CHAPTER XIV
SPECIAL COURTS
113. Establishment of Special Courts.
114. Appeal and revision.
115. Application of Bharatiya Nagarik Suraksha Sanhita to proceedings
before Special Court.
116. Cognizance of offences by court.
117. Compounding of certain offences.
CHAPTER XV
INTER-REGULATORY COORDINATION
118. Issuance or holding of other regulated instrument.
119. Listing and trading of other regulated instrument.
120. Cooperation between Board and other regulatory authority.
121. General conditions for Board and other regulatory authority.
122. Board to take action against entity registered with other regulatory
authority.
CHAPTER XVI
FINANCE, ACCOUNTS AND AUDIT
123. Grants by Central Government.
124. Fund.
125. Investor Protection and Education Fund.
126. Accounts and audit.
127. Returns and reports.
CHAPTER XVII
MISCELLANEOUS
128. Regulatory sandbox.
129. National Institute of Securities Markets.
130. Members, officers and employees of Board to be public servants.
131. Power of Central Government to issue directions.
132. Power of Board to delegate.
133. Power of Central Government to supersede Board.
134. Confidentiality to be maintained by Board and its Members.
135. Power of Central Government to grant immunity.
136. Recovery of amounts.
137. Continuance of proceedings.
138. Bar of jurisdiction of civil court.
(vi)
CLAUSES
139. Protection of action taken in good faith.
140. Exemption from tax on income.
141. Power of Board not to apply to International Financial Services Centre.
142. Application of other laws not barred.
143. Code not to apply in certain cases.
144. Power of Central Government to delegate.
145. Power to make rules.
146. Power to make regulations.
147. Process of issuing regulations.
148. Rules, regulations, bye-laws and subsidiary instructions to be laid
before Parliament.
149. Subsidiary instructions.
150. Advisory Committees.
151. Power to remove difficulties.
152. Repeal and saving.
153. References to repealed enactments.
CHAPTER XVIII
AMENDMENTS TO CERTAIN ACTS
154. Amendment of Act 12 of 1974.
155. Amendment of Act 15 of 2003.
156. Amendment of Act 17 of 2018.
157. Amendment of Act 32 of 2023.
THE FIRST SCHEDULE.
THE SECOND SCHEDULE.
THE THIRD SCHEDULE.
THE FOURTH SCHEDULE.
AS INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA
Bill No. 200 of 2025
THE SECURITIES MARKETS CODE, 2025
A
BILL
to consolidate and amend the laws relating to the securities markets and for matters
connected therewith or incidental thereto.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Seventy-sixth Year of the Republic of India
as follows:—
CHAPTER I
PRELIMINARY
5 1. (1) This Code may be called the Securities Markets Code, 2025. Short title and
commencement.
(2) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by
notification in the Official Gazette, appoint:
Provided that different dates may be appointed for different provisions of this
Code and any reference in any such provision to the commencement of this Code
10 shall be construed as a reference to the coming into force of that provision.
2
Definitions. 2. (1) In this Code, unless the context otherwise requires,—
(a) “adjudicating officer” means a person designated as such under
sub-section (1) of section 17;
(b) “Bench” means a Bench of the Tribunal;
(c) “beneficial owner” means a person whose name is recorded as such 5
with a depository in respect of any securities or other regulated instrument and
the expression “beneficial ownership” shall be construed accordingly;
(d) “Board” means the Securities and Exchange Board of India referred
to in sub-section (1) of section 3;
(e) “bye-laws” means the bye-laws made by a market infrastructure 10
institution under section 39;
(f) “Chairperson” means the Chairperson of the Board appointed under
section 4;
(g) “clearing corporation” means a person undertaking the activity of
clearing and settlement of trades in securities, but does not include a system 15
provider defined in the Payment and Settlement Systems Act, 2007. 51 of 2007.
Explanation.––For the purposes of this clause,––
(i) “clearing” means the process of transmitting, reconciling and to
the extent applicable, confirming the payment obligations or transfers of
securities prior to settlement; and 20
(ii) “settlement” means the completion of delivery and payment of
funds or securities or underlying of a derivative, to the relevant parties
in a contract in order to settle their obligations or to provide a title to the
securities or underlying or both;
(h) “clearing member” means a person having clearing and settlement 25
rights as specified in the bye-laws of a clearing corporation;
(i) “commodity” means any kind of goods, including any activity,
service, right, interest or event relating to or associated with such goods, as
may be notified by the Central Government in consultation with the Board;
(j) “contract” means a contract for or relating to the purchase or sale of 30
securities;
(k) “depository” means a person engaged in the activity of providing
depository services, but shall not include a person providing depository
services in relation to a Government security, a Registry or a ledger account
maintained by the Reserve Bank or its agent in accordance with the provisions 35
of the Government Securities Act, 2006; 38 of 2006.
(l) “depository services” means any service relating to,—
(i) recording a transaction in securities or other regulated
instrument, including the allotment or transfer or transmission of
ownership of such securities or other regulated instrument in 40
dematerialised form in the record or register of a depository;
(ii) distribution of any monetary or securities-based benefits
associated with any securities or other regulated instrument;
(iii) facilitating electronic voting and exercising any interest and
rights associated with any securities or other regulated instrument; or 45
(iv) such other services as may be specified by regulations;
3
(m) “derivative” includes,—
(i) a security derived from an underlying;
(ii) a contract for the actual or intended delivery of the underlying
on a future date and which is not a spot delivery contract;
5 (iii) a contract that derives its value from prices or indices of prices
or difference in prices of such underlying which may be settled with
physical delivery of the underlying or by paying the difference in cash
or equivalent;
(iv) a contract which provides for a right, with or without any
10 obligation for the actual delivery of the underlying on a future date;
(v) a contract or a swap agreement for exchange of cash flows or
underlying in future;
(vi) a contract which provides for exchange of one or more
payments in future based on the value of the underlying;
15 (vii) a derivative structured upon the same or a different kind of
derivative;
(viii) such other instruments as the Central Government may
notify; and
(ix) a combination of any contract or agreement specified in
20 sub-clauses (i) to (viii),
but shall not include derivative as defined in clause (a) of section 45U of the
2 of 1934. Reserve Bank of India Act, 1934 and such other instruments as the Central
Government may notify in this regard;
(n) “Fund” means the Fund referred to in sub-section (1) of section 124;
25 (o) “goods” means any kind of movable property, other than actionable
claims, money and securities;
(p) “Government security” shall have the same meaning as assigned to
38 of 2006. it in clause (f) of section 2 of the Government Securities Act, 2006;
(q) “intermediary” means,––
30 (i) an asset management company;
(ii) a banker to an issue;
(iii) a credit rating agency;
(iv) a custodian;
(v) a debenture trustee;
35 (vi) a depository participant;
(vii) an index provider in relation to indices traded in the securities
markets;
(viii) an investment adviser;
(ix) an investment manager;
40 (x) a Know Your Customer Registration Agency;
(xi) a merchant banker;
(xii) a portfolio manager;
(xiii) a pooled investment vehicle;
4
(xiv) a registrar to an issue;
(xv) a research analyst;
(xvi) a share transfer agent;
(xvii) a stock broker;
(xviii) a trading member; 5
(xix) a trustee of trust deed;
(xx) an underwriter;
(xxi) a vault manager; and
(xxii) such other persons associated with the securities markets, as
notified by the Board under sub-section (3) of section 34,
10
but shall not include a person carrying out the activities of the nature
mentioned in section 34 relating to instruments referred to in Chapter IIID of
the Reserve Bank of India Act, 1934; 2 of 1934.
(r) “investment scheme” means the scheme referred to in section 32;
(s) “Investor Protection and Education Fund” means the fund referred to 15
in section 125;
(t) “issuer” means any person who makes or proposes to make or has
made an issue of securities which are listed or to be listed;
(u) “listing” means the admission of securities for trading on a stock
exchange and the expression “listed” shall be construed accordingly; 20
(v) “market infrastructure institution” means a stock exchange, a
clearing corporation or a depository and includes such other class or classes
of market infrastructure institutions, as may be notified by the Central
Government, except those authorised or required to be authorised by other
regulatory bodies; 25
(w) “market participant” means a person or its agent participating in the
securities markets as an issuer or an investor.
Explanation.—For the purposes of this clause, an intermediary shall be
deemed to be a market participant, if it participates in the securities markets
as an investor or issuer; 30
(x) “member”, in relation to—
(i) a stock exchange or a clearing corporation, means a trading
member or a clearing member;
(ii) a depository, means a depository participant; and
(iii) any other market infrastructure institution notified under 35
clause (v), means a member of such market infrastructure institution;
(y) “notification” means a notification published in the Official Gazette
and the expressions “notify” or “notified” shall be construed accordingly;
(z) “other regulated instrument” means an instrument that is primarily
regulated by other regulatory authority; 40
(za) “other regulatory authority” means an authority or body constituted
or any department of the Central Government or the State Government
authorised, under any other law for the time being in force to regulate goods,
services, activities or transactions;
5
(zb) “person” includes—
(i) an individual;
(ii) a Hindu undivided family;
(iii) a company;
5 (iv) a firm;
(v) an association of persons or a body of individuals, whether
incorporated or not;
(vi) a limited liability partnership;
(vii) a trust;
10 (viii) local authority; and
(ix) every artificial juristic person, not falling within any of the
preceding sub-clauses;
(zc) “pooled investment vehicle” means a fund referred to in
sub-section (1) of section 33;
15 (zd) “prescribed” means prescribed by rules made under this Code;
(ze) “record” includes the records maintained in the form of books
or in such other form as may be specified by regulations and
electronic record as defined in clause (t) of section 2 of the Information
21 of 2000. Technology Act, 2000;
20 (zf) “Recovery Officer” means any officer of the Board authorised by
general or special order in writing to exercise the powers of a Recovery Officer
under this Code;
(zg) “regulations” means the regulations made by the Board;
(zh) “Schedule” means a Schedule appended to this Code;
25 (zi) “securities” include—
(i) shares, scrips, stocks, bonds, secured or unsecured debentures,
warrants, or debenture stock or other marketable securities of a like
nature in or of any incorporated company or a pooled investment vehicle
or other body corporate;
30 (ii) hybrid instruments;
(iii) convertible instruments;
(iv) derivatives;
(v) units or any other instruments issued in respect of any
investment scheme by a pooled investment vehicle to the investors in
35 such schemes;
(vi) security receipts managed and regulated in accordance with
the provisions of the Securitisation and Reconstruction of Financial
54 of 2002. Assets and Enforcement of Security Interest Act, 2002;
(vii) a certificate or an instrument, by whatever name called, issued
40 to an investor by any issuer as a special purpose distinct entity which
possesses any debt or receivable including mortgage debt, assigned to
such entity, and acknowledging the beneficial interest of such investor
in such debt or receivable including mortgage debt, as the case may be;
(viii) global depository receipts and Indian depository receipts;
6
(ix) notes or papers issued for the purpose of raising of
capital, which are listed or proposed to be listed;
(x) Electronic Gold Receipts;
(xi) Government security managed and regulated under the
provisions of the Reserve Bank of India Act, 1934 and the 5 2 of 1934.
Government Securities Act, 2006; 38 of 2006.
(xii) zero coupon zero principal instruments;
(xiii) bullion spot delivery contract and bullion depository
receipt with underlying bullion in respect of issuance and trading
in an International Financial Services Centre under the provisions 10
of the International Financial Services Centres Authority
50 of 2019.
Act, 2019;
(xiv) onshore rupee bonds issued by multilateral institutions
such as the Asian Development Bank and the International Finance
Corporation; 15
(xv) other regulated instrument, to the extent it is permitted
for listing under section 119;
(xvi) such other instruments as may be notified by the Central
Government; and
(xvii) rights or interests in securities, 20
but shall not include any unit linked insurance policy or scrips or any such
instrument or unit, by whatever name called, which provides a combined benefit
risk on the life of the persons and investment by such persons and issued by an
insurer defined in clause (9) of section 2 of the Insurance Act, 1938; 4 of 1938.
(zj) “securities markets” means the markets related to securities; 25
(zk) “securities markets service provider” means an intermediary, a
market infrastructure institution or a self-regulatory organisation;
(zl) “self-regulatory organisation” means a person, formed and promoted
by a class of intermediaries or investors;
(zm) “Special Court” means the Special Court established or designated 30
by the Central Government under section 113;
(zn) “stock exchange” means a person engaged in assisting, regulating
or controlling the business of buying, selling or dealing in securities and
undertaking other related functions, but shall not include agencies permitted
to assist or facilitate buying, selling or dealing in instruments or securities 35
under Chapter IIID of the Reserve Bank of India Act, 1934; 2 of 1934.
(zo) “subsidiary instructions” mean the instructions made under
section 149 and include any circular, master circular, guideline and such other
instrument;
(zp) “trading member” means a person having trading rights in any stock 40
exchange and includes a stock broker;
(zq) “Tribunal” means the Securities Appellate Tribunal referred to in
section 79;
(zr) “underlying” in respect of a derivative, means a security or a
commodity or an actionable claim or money or currency or indices on any 45
instrument or prices or yields or volatility or liquidity or credit score or ratings
or events or activity or progress or a situation or financial measures or other
instruments from which such derivative derives its value;
7
(zs) “unit” means an instrument by which contribution or subscription is
made by an investor to an investment scheme or to any person and represents
the beneficial interest or ownership of the unit holder in such investment
scheme or person, as the case may be;
5 (zt) “unlawful gain” means an unlawful gain including the profit made
and loss averted by a person.
(2) The words and expressions used herein and not defined, but defined in the
2 of 1934. Reserve Bank of India Act, 1934 and the Companies Act, 2013 shall have the same
18 of 2013. meanings assigned to them in those Acts.
10 CHAPTER II
ESTABLISHMENT, MANAGEMENT AND ADMINISTRATION OF BOARD
3. (1) The Securities and Exchange Board of India established and Securities and
Exchange Board
incorporated under section 3 of the Securities and Exchange Board of India
of India.
15 of 1992. Act, 1992 shall be deemed to have been established and incorporated under this
15 Code, having its head office in Mumbai.
(2) The Board may establish its offices at other places in India.
(3) On and from the date of commencement of this Code, all properties and
assets, movable or immovable, of or belonging to the Board and all rights and
liabilities of the Board, shall continue to vest in the Board.
20 4. (1) The Board shall consist of the following Members to be appointed by Composition of
the Central Government, namely:— Board.
(a) Chairperson of the Board;
(b) two Members from amongst the officers of the Ministry of the
Central Government dealing with Finance and administration of the
18 of 2013. 25 Companies Act, 2013, ex officio;
(c) one Member from amongst the officers of the Reserve Bank,
ex officio; and
(d) eleven other Members of whom at least five shall be whole-time
Members.
30 (2) Without prejudice to anything contained in section 6, on the date of the
commencement of this Code, the Chairman and Members appointed under
section 4 of the Securities and Exchange Board of India Act, 1992, shall be deemed
15 of 1992. to be the Chairperson and Members appointed under clauses (a) and (d) of
sub-section (1) for the remainder period.
35 (3) The Chairperson and Members referred to in clauses (a) and (d) of
sub-section (1) shall be appointed by the Central Government, in such manner as
may be prescribed and the members referred to in clauses (b) and (c) of that
sub-section shall be nominated by the Central Government and the Reserve Bank,
respectively.
40 (4) The Chairperson and Members referred to in clauses (a) and (d) of
sub-section (1) shall be persons of ability, integrity and standing in dealing with
problems relating to securities markets or have special knowledge or experience of
law, finance, economics, technology, commodity markets, accountancy,
administration or in any other discipline which in the opinion of the Central
45 Government is useful to the Board:
Provided that while appointing Members referred to in clause (d) of
sub-section (1), the Central Government shall endeavour to appoint at least three
persons with expertise in the securities markets.
8
Terms and 5. (1) The Chairperson and every whole-time Member of the Board shall hold
conditions of office for a term not exceeding five years:
service of
Chairperson and Provided that no person shall hold office as the Chairperson or a whole-time
Members of
Member on attaining the age of sixty-five years.
Board.
(2) Every other Member referred to in clause (d) of sub-section (1) of 5
section 4 shall hold office for a term not exceeding three years:
Provided that no person shall hold office as other Member on attaining the age
of seventy years.
(3) The other terms and conditions of service of the Chairperson and the
Members referred to in clauses (a) and (d) of sub-section (1) of section 4 shall be 10
such as may be prescribed.
(4) The term of office of ex officio Members shall continue as long as they
hold the office by virtue of which they are such Members.
(5) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (1), or sub-section (2),
the Central Government shall have the right to terminate the services of the 15
Chairperson or a Member appointed under clauses (a) and (d) of sub-section (1) of
section 4, at any time before the expiry of the period specified under sub-section (1)
or sub-section (2), by giving notice of not less than three months in writing or three
months’ salary and allowances in lieu thereof, and the Chairperson or such Member,
as the case may be, shall have the right to relinquish his office, at any time before 20
the expiry of the period specified under sub-section (1) or sub-section (2), by giving
notice of not less than three months in writing to the Central Government.
(6) The Chairperson and the whole-time Members shall not accept any
employment under the Central Government or any State Government or any
appointment with a securities markets service provider or a market participant or 25
any other person associated with securities markets for a period of one year from
the date on which they cease to hold office, except with the prior approval of the
Central Government.
Removal of 6. The Central Government shall remove a Member from the office, if such
Members from Member— 30
office.
(a) is, or at any time has been, adjudged as an insolvent;
(b) is of unsound mind and stands so declared by a competent court;
(c) has been convicted and sentenced to imprisonment for an offence
which in the opinion of the Central Government, involves moral turpitude;
(d) has, in the opinion of the Central Government, acquired any financial 35
or other interests that is likely to prejudice his functions; or
(e) has, in the opinion of the Central Government, so abused his position
as to render his continuation in the office detrimental to public interest:
Provided that no Member appointed under clauses (a) and (d) of sub-section (1)
of section 4 shall be removed under clauses (d) and (e) of this section unless such 40
Member has been given an opportunity of being heard in the matter.
Management of 7. (1) The general superintendence, directions and management of the affairs
Board.
and business of the Board shall vest in a Board of Members referred to in section 4
to exercise all powers and do all acts and things which may be exercised or done by
the Board.
45
(2) Save as otherwise provided by regulations, the Chairperson shall also have
powers of general superintendence and direction of the affairs of the Board and may
also exercise all powers and do all acts and things which may be exercised or done
by the Board, except the powers under sections 128 and 146.
50
9
8. (1) The Members of the Board shall meet at such times and places, and shall Me etings of
Board.
observe such rules of procedure in regard to the transaction of business at its
meetings, including quorum at such meetings and maintaining arrangements for
recording, safe-keeping and publications of the decisions, as may be specified by
5 regulations:
Provided that the Members of the Board may by circulation, take decisions in
such manner as may be specified by regulations.
(2) The Chairperson, or if he is unable to attend a meeting of the Board for
any reason, any other Member chosen by the Members present from amongst
10 themselves at the meeting, shall preside over the meeting.
(3) All questions which come up before any meeting of the Board shall be
decided by a majority of the Members present and voting, and in the event of
equality of votes, the Chairperson, or in his absence, the person presiding shall have
a second or casting vote.
15 (4) Any Member, who has such direct or indirect interest, including the interest
of any family member, as may be specified by regulations, in any matter coming up
for consideration at a meeting of the Board shall, as soon as possible after the said
interest has come to his knowledge, disclose the nature of his interest at such
meeting and such disclosure shall be recorded in the proceedings of the meeting of
20 the Board, and such Member shall not take any part in any deliberation or decision
of the Board with respect to that matter.
(5) The provisions of sub-sections (3) and (4) shall mutatis mutandis apply to
all decisions taken by way of circulation.
9. (1) The Board may appoint such other officers and employees as it considers Officers and
25 necessary for the efficient discharge of its functions under this Code. employees of
Board.
(2) The qualifications, method of recruitment and terms and other conditions
of service of officers and employees of the Board appointed under sub-section (1)
shall be such as may be specified by regulations.
10. No act or proceeding of the Board shall be invalid merely by reason of,— Vacancies, etc.,
not to invalidate
30 (a) any vacancy in, or any defect in the constitution of the Board; proceedings of
Board.
(b) any defect in the appointment of a person acting as a Member of the
Board; or
(c) any irregularity in the procedure of the Board not affecting the merits
of the case.
35 11. (1) Subject to the provisions of this Code, the Board shall protect the Powers and
interest of investors in securities and promote the development of, and regulate the functions of
Board.
securities markets, by such measures as it may deem fit.
(2) Without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing provisions, the Board
shall exercise the powers and perform the following functions, namely:––
40 (a) register and regulate the market infrastructure institution;
(b) register and regulate the intermediaries;
(c) register and regulate the self-regulatory organisations;
(d) regulate the business in securities markets;
(e) regulate the issue, listing, delisting, transfer of securities, dealings in
45 securities and other related matters by market participant, subject to the
provisions of Chapter XV;
10
(f) regulate or prohibit the public issue of any prospectus, offer document
or advertisement soliciting money by way of issue of securities;
(g) regulate or prohibit the solicitation of money from investors in
respect of any investment scheme;
(h) regulate substantial acquisition of shares and take-over of companies; 5
(i) regulate the working of any class or classes of market participants,
either directly or indirectly through a market infrastructure institution or a
self-regulatory organisation;
(j) regulate the qualifications and certification of the securities markets
service providers; 10
(k) protect the interest of investors, promote investor education and
awareness and ensure effective and time-bound redressal of investor
grievances;
(l) prohibit fraudulent and unfair practices relating to the securities
markets and market abuse; 15
(m) promote training of intermediaries and market participants;
(n) promote transparency and best practices in its governance;
(o) ensure fair and timely disclosure of information by a securities
markets service provider;
(p) ensure adequate training and capacity-building of its officers and 20
employees for facilitating efficient discharge of functions;
(q) lay down principles for implementation of this Code;
(r) call for information from a securities markets service provider or a
market participant or any other person associated with securities markets for
the implementation of this Code; 25
(s) call for information and records from any person including any bank
or a financial institution or any other authority or board or corporation
established or constituted by or under any Central Act or State Act, which may
be relevant to any inspection, investigation or adjudication in respect of any
transaction in securities; 30
(t) call for information from or furnish information to, other authorities,
whether in India or outside India, in the matters relating to prevention or
detection of contraventions in respect of securities laws, subject to the
provisions of other laws for the time being in force:
Provided that the Board, for the purposes of furnishing any information 35
to any authority outside India, may enter into an arrangement or agreement or
understanding with such authority with the prior approval of the Central
Government;
(u) undertake inspection, investigation and adjudication;
(v) share any information or other documents obtained during 40
inspection, investigation or adjudication, as the case may be, regarding the
contravention of any other law for the time being in force with the authorities
concerned, if such information or documents are relevant or useful to such
authority;
(w) levy fees or other charges for carrying out the purposes of this Code 45
which shall be reviewed periodically;
11
(x) conduct periodic research, regulatory impact assessment studies and
audit of functioning and performance of securities markets including securities
markets service provider, and publish such information and data on its
website;
5 (y) maintain its website or any other universally accessible database of
electronic information on securities markets, and publish on such website or
database all regulations, subsidiary instructions, orders of the adjudicating
officer and the Ombudsperson and any other information as it deems fit; and
(z) perform such other functions as may be prescribed.
10 (3) The Board shall review its performance and functioning including
proportionality and effectiveness of the regulations made in this behalf.
(4) Notwithstanding anything contained in any other law for the time being in
force, while exercising the powers under clause (r) or clause (s) or clause (u) of
sub-section (2), the Board shall have the same powers as are vested in a civil court
5 of 1908. 15 under the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908 while trying a suit, in respect of the
following matters, namely:—
(a) the discovery and production of books of account and other
documents, at such place and time as may be specified by the Board;
(b) summoning and enforcing the attendance of persons and examining
20 them on oath;
(c) inspection of any books, registers and other documents of a securities
markets service provider or an issuer, at any place; or
(d) issuing commissions for the examination of witnesses or documents.
CHAPTER III
25 INSPECTION, INVESTIGATION, ADJUDICATION AND INTERIM ORDER
12. The Board may inspect a securities markets service provider, a market Inspection.
participant or any other person associated with securities markets in such manner as
may be specified by regulations:
Provided that the Board may order inspection of any book or register or other
30 document or record of any issuer, not being an intermediary, where the Board has
reasonable grounds to believe that such issuer has been indulging in fraudulent or
unfair practices or market abuse referred to in section 92 or section 93, as the case
may be.
13. (1) If the Board, on receipt of any information or otherwise, has reasonable Investigation.
35 grounds to believe that—
(a) transactions in securities are being undertaken in a manner
detrimental to the investors or the securities markets;
(b) any securities markets service provider, a market participant or any
other person associated with the securities markets has contravened any of the
40 provisions of this Code or the rules or regulations made thereunder, or any
order issued by the Board; or
(c) any person has aided or abetted such contraventions,
it may, by an order in writing, direct one or more persons from amongst its
Chairperson, whole-time Members or officers, to act as the Investigating Officer to
45 investigate into such transactions or contraventions or the affairs of such securities
markets service provider, a market participant or any other person associated with
the securities markets and submit a report to the Board:
12
Provided that the Board may seek assistance of a securities markets service
provider or an expert to assist the Investigating Officer under this Chapter, in such
manner as may be specified by regulations.
(2) The order referred to in sub-section (1) shall be in such form as may be
specified by regulations and the investigation shall be completed within a period of 5
one hundred and eighty days:
Provided that where the investigation report is not submitted within the
aforesaid period, the Investigating Officer shall provide the status of the
investigation to the Board and record the reasons for the delay and request the
whole-time Member concerned for extension of time: 10
Provided further that on receipt of a request for extension of time, the
whole-time Member, if necessary, grant such extension, with such conditions, if
any, as he may deem fit, or reject the request.
(3) The Investigating Officer shall, if quantifiable, quantify the unlawful gains
made or likely to be made or the loss caused, or likely to be caused to an investor or 15
group of investors as a result of any default or contravention in accordance with
such criteria and manner as may be specified by regulations.
(4) If the Board, upon consideration of the investigation report is of the opinion
that further investigation is called for, it may, by an order direct the Investigating
Officer to make further investigation and submit a supplementary report within such 20
period as specified therein.
(5) The procedure for conducting investigation under this Chapter shall be
such as may be specified by regulations.
General powers 14. (1) Notwithstanding anything contained in any other law for the time being
and obligations in force, where an investigation has been directed under section 13,—
25
of Investigating
Officer. (a) every key managerial personnel, director, manager, secretary or other
officer or employee of a securities markets service provider or a market
participant or a person being a body corporate;
(b) every trustee or manager or employee of a securities markets service
provider or a market participant or a person being a trust; 30
(c) every partner, manager, secretary or key managerial personnel or
other officer of the firm or society of a securities markets service provider or
a market participant or a person being a firm or society; and
(d) every other person or body of persons who has or had dealings in the
course of business with any of the persons mentioned in clauses (a), (b) and 35
(c), whether directly or indirectly,
shall—
(i) preserve and produce before the Investigating Officer or any person
authorised by him in this behalf, all such books of account, registers, records,
information and other documents in his custody or power relating to or having 40
a bearing on the subject-matter of such investigation, as the case may be;
(ii) furnish any such statement or undertaking or certification relating
thereto, as may be required, within such period as specified by the
Investigating Officer or any person authorised by him in this behalf;
(iii) provide reasonable assistance to the Investigating Officer or any 45
person authorised by him in this behalf, relating to the investigation; and
(iv) appear personally and take oath before the Investigating Officer
when required to do so and answer any question put to him during such
appearance in relation to the affairs of his business.
13
(2) The Investigating Officer shall record the examination referred to in
sub-section (1) in writing, which shall be read over and explained to, or by, and
signed by the person examined, which may thereafter be used in evidence.
(3) The Investigating Officer may keep in his custody any books, registers,
5 other documents and record produced under sub-section (1) for a period of six
months and shall thereafter return the same to the person concerned.
(4) The Investigating Officer, if deems necessary, may again call for any book,
register, other document and record.
(5) If the person who produced the books, registers, other documents and
10 records under sub-section (1), requires certified copies of the same, the Investigating
Officer shall provide such copies.
(6) The Investigating Officer shall, before exercising his powers under this
section against any person, serve a notice to him, in such form and manner as may
be specified by regulations:
15 Provided that where the Investigating Officer is satisfied that the issuance of
a notice shall cause undue delay in investigation or there is an apprehension that
records, books of account, registers, information and other documents referred to in
sub-section (1) may be destroyed, mutilated, concealed, altered, falsified or
secreted, after the notice is served, he may, for reasons to be recorded in writing,
20 dispense with issuance of such notice.
(7) Notwithstanding anything contained in any other law for the time being in
force, the Investigating Officer shall have the same powers as are vested in a civil
5 of 1908. court under the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908 while trying a suit, in respect of the
following matters, namely:—
25 (a) the discovery and production of books of account and other
documents, at such place and such time as may be specified by the Board;
(b) summoning and enforcing the attendance of persons and examining
them on oath;
(c) inspection of any books, registers and other documents of a securities
30 markets service provider or an issuer, at any place; and
(d) issuing commissions for the examination of witnesses or documents.
15. (1) Where in the course of an investigation, the Investigating Officer has Search and
reasonable grounds to believe that the books, registers, other documents and records seizure.
of, or relating to, any person, may be destroyed, mutilated, altered, concealed,
35 falsified or secreted, the Investigating Officer may make an application to the
Special Court for seizure of such books, registers, other documents and record.
(2) After considering the application and hearing the Investigating Officer, if
necessary, the Special Court may, by order, authorise the Investigating Officer or
any person authorised by him during the investigation—
40 (a) to enter, with such assistance, as may be required, the place or places
where such books, registers, other documents and records are kept;
(b) to search that place or those places in the manner specified in the
order; and
(c) to seize books, registers, other documents and record, as he considers
45 necessary for the purposes of the investigation:
Provided that the Special Court shall not authorise seizure of books, registers,
other documents and record, of any issuer, not being an intermediary, unless such
issuer indulges in market abuse referred to in section 93.
14
(3) The Investigating Officer may requisition the services of any police officer
or any officer of the Central Government, or of both, to assist him for all or any of
the purposes specified in sub-section (2) and it shall be the duty of every such officer
to comply with such requisition.
(4) The Investigating Officer shall keep in his custody the books, registers, 5
other documents and record seized under this section for such period as he considers
necessary, not later than the conclusion of the investigation and thereafter shall
return the same to the person from whose custody or power those were seized under
sub-section (2) and inform the Special Court of such return:
Provided that the Investigating Officer may, before returning such books, 10
registers, other documents and record as aforesaid, place identification marks on
them or any part thereof.
(5) Save as otherwise provided in this section, every search or seizure made
under this section shall be carried out in accordance with the provisions of the
Bharatiya Nagarik Suraksha Sanhita, 2023. 15 46 of 2023.
Bar on initiation 16. (1) The Board shall not direct,—
of inspection or
investigation. (a) an inspection under section 12; or
(b) an investigation under section 13,
for default or contravention of any provisions of this Code or rules or regulations
made thereunder, after the expiry of a period of eight years from the date of default 20
or contravention:
Provided that the Board may direct inspection or investigation after the period
specified above, in the event of a matter being referred to it by an investigating
agency or if in the opinion of the Board, the default or contravention had or may
have a systemic impact on the securities markets. 25
(2) In case of a continuing default or contravention, a fresh period under
sub-section (1) shall begin to run at every moment of the time during which the
default or contravention continues.
(3) If more than one default or contravention is committed in a series of
connected acts forming the same transaction and such default or contravention are 30
committed at different times, the period under sub-section (1) for these defaults or
contraventions shall be deemed to have begun from the date of the last default or
contravention.
Power of Board 17. (1) Subject to sub-section (2), where the Board, after consideration of—
to designate
adjudicating (a) the findings of the inspection made under section 12; 35
officer.
(b) the investigation report, together with any supplementary report,
received under section 13,
and any other information, if any, is of the opinion that there are sufficient grounds
to pass an order under section 20, it may designate one or more persons from
amongst its Chairperson, whole-time Members or any other officer not below such 40
rank of a Division Chief, as may be specified by regulations, to act as an adjudicating
officer for the purposes of this Chapter.
(2) No person shall be designated as an adjudicating officer, if he has––
(a) authorised the initiation of the inspection or investigation, which is
the basis for issuance of a show cause notice to a person in that matter; or 45
(b) been involved in the conduct of the inspection or investigation, which
is the basis for issuance of a show cause notice to a person or assisted in the
conduct of such processes in that matter; or
15
(c) considered the findings of the inspection or investigation in that
matter and decided to appoint the adjudicating officer for adjudication under
this Chapter; or
(d) considered any settlement application filed by a person to whom a
5 show cause notice is to be issued in that matter; or
(e) passed an interim order under sub-section (2) of section 27.
(3) Where a person is designated as an adjudicating officer under
sub-section (1), he shall not––
(a) conduct the inspection or investigation in respect of the person to
10 whom the adjudicating officer has issued a show cause notice until the final
disposal of the matter relating to such show cause notice; and
(b) consider or take a decision on any settlement application filed by a
person to whom the adjudicating officer has issued a show cause notice.
(4) The adjudication proceedings shall be conducted in such manner as may
15 be specified by regulations.
18. (1) For the purposes of adjudication under this Code, the adjudicating Power of
officer shall issue a show cause notice to the person concerned specifying the nature adjudicating
of the default or contravention alleged to have been committed, the period for reply
officer.
to such notice, and enclose such relevant documents and particulars as may be
20 specified by regulations.
(2) The person to whom a show cause notice has been issued under
sub-section (1), shall submit the reply in writing along with evidence in support, if
any, within such period as specified therein.
(3) If the noticee fails to show cause within the period specified therein, the
25 adjudicating officer shall proceed to adjudicate the matter ex parte.
(4) Notwithstanding anything contained in any other law for the time being in
force, the adjudicating officer shall have the same powers as are vested in a civil
court under the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908 while trying a suit, in respect of the
5 of 1908.
following matters, namely:—
30 (a) the discovery and production of books of account and other
documents, at such place and time as may be specified by adjudicating officer;
(b) summoning and enforcing the attendance of persons and examining
them on oath;
(c) inspection of any books, registers and other documents of a securities
35 markets service provider or an issuer, at any place; and
(d) issuing commissions for the examination of witnesses or documents.
19. The adjudicating officer shall have due regard to the following factors Factors for
adjudication.
before making any order under section 20, namely:—
(a) the order shall be proportionate to the default or contravention
40 committed by the noticee and act as a deterrent against the commission of such
default or contravention by the noticee or any other person in future;
(b) the nature, seriousness and impact of the default or contravention,
including,—
(i) whether the contravention was deliberate, reckless or negligent;
45 (ii) duration and frequency or repetitive nature of the default or
contravention;
(iii) unlawful gains made or likely to be made as a result of the
default or contravention;
16
(iv) loss caused or likely to be caused to an investor or group of
investors as a result of the default or contravention; or
(v) the impact of the default or contravention on the integrity of the
securities markets;
(c) conduct of the noticee after the default or contravention, including— 5
(i) bringing to the notice of the Board, the default or contravention
within a reasonable time;
(ii) remedial or preventive measures taken in respect of the default
or contravention;
(iii) extent of cooperation with the Board during the inspection, 10
investigation or adjudication;
(d) past conduct of the noticee or whether the noticee fulfils the
fit-and-proper criteria to render its services in the securities markets;
(e) action taken in previous similar cases by any adjudicating officer; and
(f) any other factors which the adjudicating officer may consider necessary. 15
Final order by 20. The adjudicating officer shall, on receipt of the reply to the show cause
adjudicating notice and after considering all the relevant materials on record, by an order, either
officer.
dismiss the show cause notice if no cause exists, or if sufficient cause exists take
one or more of the following actions, namely:—
(a) suspend or cancel the certificate of registration granted under this Code; 20
(b) issue appropriate directions or warnings under section 23;
(c) pass an order under section 24;
(d) direct disgorgement under section 25; or
(e) impose penalty under sections 97 to 109:
Provided that no order shall be passed unless the person concerned has been 25
given an opportunity of being heard in the matter.
Board to call for 21. (1) The Board may, call for and examine the record of any proceedings
records. under this section within a period of thirty days from the date of the order passed by
the adjudicating officer under section 20, and if it considers that such order is not in
the interest of the securities markets, it may, after making or causing to be made 30
such inquiry as it deems necessary, pass an order enhancing the quantum of penalty
or the severity of any direction, if the circumstances of the case so justify:
Provided that no such order shall be passed unless the person concerned has
been given an opportunity of being heard in the matter:
Provided further that the Board shall not call for the records and pass an order, 35
where an appeal has been filed and disposed of under section 85.
(2) The Board shall pass an order within a period of four months from the date
of calling for the record of any proceedings under this section.
(3) The provisions of sub-sections (2) and (3) of section 17 shall, mutatis
mutandis, apply to sub-sections (1) and (2). 40
Power of 22. The adjudicating officer or the Board may, on his or its own motion or on
adjudicating a request made by any of the aggrieved party, modify an order passed under
officer or Board
section 20 or section 21, as the case may be, to rectify any error apparent on the face
to rectify order.
of the record, within a period of thirty days from the date of such order:
Provided that while rectifying the error, the adjudicating officer or the Board 45
shall not modify substantive part of the order.
17
23. (1) Where the adjudicating officer is satisfied that it is necessary— Pow er of
adjudicating
(a) in the interest of investors, or orderly development of securities markets; officer to issue
directions or
(b) to prevent the affairs of any securities markets service provider or a warnings.
market participant, being conducted in a manner detrimental to the interests of
5 investors or securities markets; or
(c) to secure the proper management of the persons referred to in clause (b),
he may issue such directions or warnings, to all or any such securities markets
service provider or a market participant or any other person associated with
securities markets, as deemed fit.
10 (2) The directions or warnings referred to in sub-section (1), may include one
or more of the following actions, namely:—
(a) suspension of trading of any securities on a stock exchange, subject
to the orderly close out;
(b) suspension of clearing of any contracts by any clearing corporation;
(c) cancelling or annulling any trades, or execution of any contract on any
15
stock exchange in full or part, and reversing any payments made in respect thereof;
(d) restraining persons from accessing the securities markets and
prohibiting any person associated with securities markets to buy, sell or deal
in securities for such period as may be specified in the order;
20 (e) suspending any office-bearer of any market infrastructure institution
or self-regulatory organisation or securities markets service provider from
holding such position for such period and in such entities or class of entities
as may be specified in the order;
(f) directing a person holding securities or rights over any securities or
25 voting or management rights in an issuer, to divest its holdings or rights, in
such manner as may be specified in the order;
(g) directing any securities markets service provider, market
infrastructure institution or self-regulatory organisation, to divest its securities
or rights, in other entities, held in contravention of the provisions of this Code
or the rules or regulations made thereunder and providing the manner of such
30
disinvestment as may be specified in the order;
(h) directing the transfer of any proceeds or any securities to a designated
account;
(i) impounding and retaining the proceeds or securities in respect of any
35 transaction under adjudication;
(j) pending adjudication, attach bank accounts or other property of any
person involved in contravention of any of the provisions of this Code or the
rules or regulations made thereunder, for a period not exceeding ninety days:
Provided that the Board shall within the said period of attachment, obtain
40 confirmation of the same from the Special Court having jurisdiction and, on
such confirmation, the attachment shall continue and upon conclusion of the
said proceedings, the provisions of section 136 shall apply:
Provided further that the property, bank account or accounts or any
transaction entered therein, in so far as it relates to the proceeds actually
45 involved in the contravention of any of the provisions of this Code or the rules
or regulations made thereunder shall be allowed to be attached; or
(k) pending adjudication, direct any person not to dispose of or alienate
an asset forming part of any transaction which is under adjudication:
18
Provided that the adjudicating officer may, take any of the actions
specified in clause (i) or clause (j) or clause (k), in respect of any issuer, not
being an intermediary, where he has reasonable grounds to believe that such
issuer has indulged in fraudulent and unfair practices or market abuse
referred to in section 92 or section 93, as the case may be. 5
Person to cease 24. If the adjudicating officer, pending adjudication or on completion thereof,
and desist from
finds that any person has contravened, or is likely to contravene, any provisions of this
committing
contravention. Code or the rules or regulations made thereunder, he may pass an order requiring such
person to cease and desist from committing or causing such contravention:
Provided that the adjudicating officer shall not pass such order in respect of 10
any issuer, not being an intermediary, unless the adjudicating officer has
reasonable grounds to believe that such issuer has indulged in market abuse
referred to in section 93.
Power of 25. (1) The adjudicating officer may direct any person who has made an
disgorgement unlawful gain by indulging in any transaction or activity in default or contravention 15
and restitution.
of any of the provisions of this Code or the rules or regulations made thereunder, to
disgorge an amount equivalent to the unlawful gain made by such contravention.
(2) The Board may provide restitution to the persons who have been affected
by the default or contravention, from the amount so disgorged under
sub-section (1), following such procedure and such criteria for distribution of the 20
disgorged amount and the order of priority as may be specified by regulations, if
the following conditions are satisfied,—
(a) the loss suffered is directly attributable to the default or contravention;
(b) the person who suffered the loss is identifiable;
(c) the amount disgorged is sufficient to provide restitution to similarly 25
placed persons; and
(d) such other conditions as may be specified by regulations.
Settlement of 26. (1) Notwithstanding anything contained in any other law for the time
administrative being in force, any person,—
and civil
proceedings. (a) who seeks to voluntarily disclose any true and vital information 30
which may amount to a contravention of the provisions of this Code and any
rules or regulations made thereunder; or
(b) against whom any proceedings may be initiated or have been
initiated and are pending before the Board or any court or Tribunal,
may file an application in writing to the Board, proposing for settlement of the 35
proceedings initiated or to be initiated, subject to such conditions and payment of
such fee, within such time and in such manner, as may be specified by regulations.
(2) The Board may constitute a committee with such members on such terms
and conditions for advising it for the settlement of proceedings in such manner as
may be specified by regulations. 40
(3) The Board may, after taking into consideration the nature, gravity and
impact of default or contravention, the advice of the committee constituted for the
purpose and such other factors as may be specified by regulations, by an order,
consider the proposal for settlement, on payment of such amount by the applicant
and on such terms and conditions as may be determined by the Board: 45
Provided that where the proposal for settlement is considered by the Board
during the pendency of the proceedings before a court or Tribunal, it shall place
such proposal before such court or Tribunal for appropriate order.
19
(4) Where an application under sub-section (1) is filed after the designation
of the adjudicating officer, the adjudication proceedings shall continue, but no
order under section 20 shall be passed till the settlement of such application is
decided by the Board, and if the proposal for settlement is,—
5 (a) agreed by the Board, the adjudicating officer shall, by an order,
dismiss the show cause notice in respect of the applicant; or
(b) rejected by the Board, the adjudicating officer shall proceed to
complete the adjudication and shall pass an order under section 20.
(5) If the applicant fails to comply with terms and conditions referred to in
10 sub-section (3), then the proceedings shall be initiated or continued before the
adjudicating officer or the Tribunal or the court, as the case may be.
(6) The settlement proceedings shall be conducted in such manner as may be
specified by regulations.
(7) No appeal shall lie to the Tribunal under section 85 against any order
15 passed under this section.
(8) All settlement amounts, excluding the disgorgement amount and legal
costs, realised under this Code shall be credited to the Consolidated Fund of India
in such manner as may be prescribed.
27. (1) The Board may, for the purpose of passing an interim order authorise Power of Board
20 the Chairperson, a whole-time Member or an officer not below the rank of and adjudicating
officer to pass
Division Chief, if,—
interim order.
(a) pending inspection under section 12 or investigation under section 13;
(b) upon completion of inspection under section 12 or investigation under
section 13 but the adjudicating officer has not been designated under section 17,
25 it has reasonable grounds to believe that the person being inspected or investigated
is taking or is about to take any action which—
(i) contravenes the provisions of this Code or the rules or regulations made
thereunder;
(ii) may prevent the person from conducting inspection or investigation; or
30 (iii) may adversely affect the conduct of adjudication:
Provided that no person shall be authorised to pass an interim order in any
matter, if such person is conducting or has conducted inspection or investigation in
such matter.
(2) The person authorised under sub-section (1) or where the adjudication
proceeding is pending, the adjudicating officer, as the case may be, may, pass an
35
interim order, for reasons to be recorded in writing, if he has reasonable grounds to
believe that if no such order is passed,—
(i) the interests of investors or securities markets shall be adversely affected;
(ii) the person conducting inspection or the Investigating Officer shall not
40 be able to carry out pending inspection or investigation, as the case may be; or
(iii) the final order to be passed by the adjudicating officer under
section 20 cannot be enforced due to change of circumstances:
Provided that no order shall be passed unless an opportunity of being heard is
given to the person concerned:
20
Provided further that in cases of urgency, where the object of granting the
interim order is likely to be defeated by delay, the requirement of providing an
opportunity of being heard before passing an order may be dispensed with for
reasons to be recorded in writing, and the concerned person shall be given an
opportunity of being heard as soon as practicable thereafter. 5
(3) The interim order shall be valid for a period not exceeding one hundred
and eighty days.
(4) On the expiry of the period specified in sub-section (3), if the inspection
or investigation has not been completed or the inspection or investigation is
completed but an adjudicating officer has not been designated or the adjudication 10
is pending, as the case may be, and an extension of the interim order is sought, the
Board may designate not more than three persons from amongst its Chairperson
and whole-time Members, who, if satisfied, may extend such interim order in
writing for a further period not exceeding two years.
(5) The provisions of sections 23 and 24 shall, mutatis mutandis apply to all 15
the proceedings for passing an interim order.
CHAPTER IV
REGISTRATION OF INTERMEDIARIES AND OTHER PERSONS, INVESTMENT SCHEMES AND
RELATED MATTERS
Registration of 28. (1) No person shall carry on its business as an intermediary or a 2 0
intermediaries, self-regulatory organisation or sponsor or cause to be sponsored or carry on or
etc.
cause to be carried on any pooled investment vehicle or any investment scheme
unless it is registered with the Board under this Code.
(2) Any person desirous of being registered under this Chapter, shall make an
application to the Board in such form and manner, subject to such criteria and 25
accompanied by such fee, as may be specified by regulations:
Provided that if the application is found to be defective, the Board may return
the application for rectification, if rectifiable, within such period as may be
specified by regulations.
(3) On receipt of an application under sub-section (2), the Board, on being 30
satisfied that the application fulfils the requirements referred to in sub-section (2),
may grant a certificate of registration to the applicant for such period, in such form
and manner, subject to such terms and conditions, and within such period as may
be specified by regulations:
Provided that the applicant who has been granted a certificate of registration 35
under this sub-section, shall comply with such additional conditions as may be
specified by regulations from time to time.
(4) No application for the grant of registration under this section shall be
rejected, without giving an opportunity of being heard to the applicant and the
reasons for such refusal shall be communicated to the applicant in writing. 40
Surrender, 29. (1) Any person who has been issued a certificate of registration under
suspension and section 28 may apply to the Board for surrender of such certificate in such form and
cancellation of
manner, subject to such conditions as may be specified by regulations, and the Board
certificate of
registration. may,—
(a) by an order revoke the registration, if it is satisfied that such 45
certificate may be surrendered; and
(b) impose any conditions to be fulfilled by the applicant before the
certificate of registration is surrendered:
Provided that no conditions which are prejudicial to the applicant shall be
imposed before giving him an opportunity of being heard.
50
21
(2) Without prejudice to sub-section (1), the adjudicating officer may
suspend or cancel the certificate of registration under clause (a) of section 20, for
such period as may be specified by regulations, on any of the following grounds,
namely:—
5 (a) the person has not fulfilled the conditions of registration or has
failed to comply with any specified criteria for obtaining the certificate of
registration;
(b) the person has obtained the certificate of registration by making a
false statement or misrepresentation or by any other unlawful means;
10
(c) the person has contravened the provisions of this Code or the rules
or regulations or bye-laws made thereunder; or
(d) any other grounds as may be specified by regulations:
Provided that no order shall be made under this section unless the applicant
has been given an opportunity of being heard.
15 30. (1) The Board may register such class or classes of investors as may be Registration of
specified by regulations and no such person shall carry on its investment activity or investors.
business without such registration.
(2) The provisions of sections 28 and 29 shall, mutatis mutandis, apply in
relation to registration of the persons referred to in sub-section (1).
20 31. (1) The Board may, delegate the power of registration of any class or Board to delegate
classes of intermediaries or investors to a market infrastructure institution or a power of
registration.
self-regulatory organisation, by an order in writing, subject to such conditions, if
any, specified therein.
(2) The provisions of sections 28 and 29 shall, mutatis mutandis, apply for
25 such registration under sub-section (1).
(3) The market infrastructure institution or a self-regulatory organisation to
whom the power has been delegated under sub-section (1), shall,—
(a) maintain standards of fairness and confidentiality while exercising
such delegated powers; and
(b) not refuse to grant a certificate of registration to a person, except by
30
an order, after giving him an opportunity of being heard.
(4) Where the market infrastructure institution or the self-regulatory
organisation refuses to grant a certificate of registration to any person, such person
may apprise the Board of such refusal in writing, and the Board may issue
35 appropriate directions in the matter.
32. (1) Any scheme or arrangement, the purpose or effect of which is to Investment
enable persons taking part in the same, whether by becoming owners of any asset schemes.
or any part of it or otherwise, to participate in or receive beneficial interest in the
form of profits or income or dividend or any produce or benefit arising from the
acquisition, holding, management or disposal of any asset or sums paid out of such
40
profits or income or dividend or produce or benefit, and where,—
(a) the persons participating in such scheme or arrangement do not
have day-to-day control over the management of such assets, irrespective of
whether or not they have the right to be consulted or to give directions; and
45 (b) the scheme or arrangement has the following characteristics,—
(i) the contribution of the persons participating in such scheme or
arrangement and the profits or income or dividend or any produce or
benefit out of which payments to be made to such person are pooled;
22
(ii) the contribution of the persons participating in such scheme or
arrangement or the asset acquired using the contributions is managed as
a whole by some person on behalf of the persons participating in such
scheme or arrangement; and
(iii) the arrangement is not regulated by any other regulatory 5
authority,
shall be an investment scheme.
(2) The following schemes and arrangements shall not be treated as
investment schemes—
(a) being made or offered by a co-operative society registered under the 10
Co-operative Societies Act, 1912 or a society registered or deemed to be 2 of 1912.
registered under any law relating to the co-operative societies for the time
being in force in any State; or
(b) being deposits which are accepted by a non-banking financial company
as defined in clause (f) of section 45-I of the Reserve Bank of India Act, 1934; or 15 2 of 1934.
(c) being a contract of insurance to which the Insurance Act, 1938, 4 of 1938.
applies; or
(d) being any Scheme, Pension Scheme or the Insurance Scheme made
under the Employees Provident Fund and Miscellaneous Provisions
Act, 1952; or 20 19 of 1952.
(e) being a deposit as defined in clause (31) of section 2 of the
Companies Act, 2013 are accepted; or 18 of 2013.
(f) being deposits which are accepted by a company declared as a Nidhi or
a Mutual Benefit Society under section 406 of the Companies Act, 2013; or 18 of 2013.
(g) being a chit business as defined in clause (e) of section 2 of the Chit 25
Fund Act, 1982; or 40 of 1982.
(h) being deposits which are accepted for the purpose of real estate
project as defined in clause (zn) of section 2 of the Real Estate (Regulation
and Development) Act, 2016; or 16 of 2016.
(i) being a unit linked insurance policy or scrips or any such instrument 30
or unit, by whatever name called, which provides a component of investment
besides the component of insurance issued by an insurer as defined in
clause (9) of section 2 of the Insurance Act, 1938; or 4 of 1938.
(j) such other schemes or arrangements which the Central Government
may, in consultation with the Board, notify. 35
(3) The investment schemes shall be conducted, operated or promoted
including the matters relating to the contribution or subscription made by an
investor in such manner as may be specified by regulations.
Pooled 33. (1) A pooled investment vehicle means a fund established in respect of an
investment investment scheme, in the form of a trust or otherwise, such as a mutual fund, an 40
vehicles.
alternative investment fund, a real estate investment trust, an infrastructure
investment trust or such other fund, which raises or collects money from investors
and invests such funds in such manner as may be specified by regulations.
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in the Indian Trusts Act, 1882 or in 2 of 1882.
any other law for the time being in force or in any judgment, decree or order of any 45
court, tribunal or any other authority, a pooled investment vehicle, whether
constituted as a trust or otherwise, and registered with the Board, shall be eligible
to borrow and issue debt securities in such manner and to such extent as may be
specified by regulations.
23
(3) Every pooled investment vehicle referred to in sub-section (2) shall,
subject to the provisions of the trust deed, be permitted to provide security interest
to lenders in terms of the facility documents entered into by such pooled
investment vehicle.
5 (4) Where any pooled investment vehicle referred to in sub-section (2),
defaults in repayment of principal amount or payment of interest or any such
amount due to the lender, the lender shall recover the defaulted amount and
enforce security interest, if any, against the trust assets, by initiating proceedings
against the trustee acting on behalf of such pooled investment vehicle in
10 accordance with the terms and conditions specified in the facility documents:
Provided that on initiation of the proceedings against the trust assets, the
trustee shall not be personally liable and his assets shall not be utilised towards
recovery of such debt.
(5) The trust assets, which remain after recovery of defaulted amount, shall
15 be remitted to the unit holders on a proportionate basis.
34. (1) An intermediary shall facilitate or provide services related to the Intermediary.
issue, sale, purchase or any dealings in securities in such manner as may be
specified by regulations.
(2) A stock broker shall charge brokerage, deliver securities and make
20 payment to the investor in such manner and within such period as may be specified
by regulations.
(3) The Board may, if required, notify a new category of intermediary for the
development of securities markets.
35. (1) The securities markets service provider shall make fair disclosure of Obligation of
25 such information and at such frequency as may be specified by regulations. securities markets
service provider,
(2) The securities markets service provider, market participant or a person market
associated with securities markets shall furnish such information to the Board in participant, etc.
such manner as may be specified by regulations.
(3) The securities markets service provider shall invest money collected by it
30 in such manner and within such period as may be specified by regulations.
36. (1) The Board shall approve the governing norms of a self-regulatory Governing norms
organisation. of self-regulatory
organisations.
(2) The governing norms of a self-regulatory organisation shall provide for
the governance and operation of any contracts or agreements between them and
35 their members including norms relating to the internal constitution and
management of their affairs.
CHAPTER V
REGISTRATION AND REGULATION OF MARKET INFRASTRUCTURE INSTITUTION
37. (1) No person shall carry on its business as a market infrastructure Registration of
40 institution, unless it is registered with the Board under this Code. market
infrastructure
(2) Any person desirous of being registered as a market infrastructure institution.
institution shall make an application to the Board in such form and manner and
accompanied by such fee, as may be specified by regulations, including a copy of
the bye-laws referred to in section 39 for the regulation and control of contracts
45 and a copy of documents relating in general to the constitution of the market
in frastructure institution and in particular to,––
(a) the governing body of such market infrastructure institution, its
constitution and powers of management and the manner in which its business
is to be transacted;
24
(b) the powers and duties of the office bearers of the market
infrastructure institution;
(c) the admission into the market infrastructure institution of various
classes of members, the qualifications for membership, and the exclusion,
suspension, expulsion and re-admission of members therefrom or thereinto; 5
(d) the procedure for the registration of partnerships as members of the
market infrastructure institution in cases where the rules provide for such
membership; and
(e) the nomination and appointment of authorised representatives and clerks.
(3) If the Board is satisfied, after making such inquiry as may be necessary in this 10
behalf and after obtaining such other information, if any, as it may require that,—
(a) the bye-laws of the market infrastructure institution are in
conformity with such conditions as may be specified by regulations, with a
view to ensure fair dealing and to protect the interest of investors;
(b) the applicant is willing to comply with any other conditions, 15
including conditions regarding its members, which the Board, after
consultation with the governing board of the applicant and having regard to
its standing and the nature of the securities dealt with by it, may impose for
the purpose of carrying out the objects of the Code; and
(c) it shall be in the interest of trade and also in public interest to grant 20
registration,
it may grant registration to the applicant in such form and subject to such
conditions as may be specified by regulations:
Provided that if the application is found to be defective, the Board may return
the application for rectification, if rectifiable, within such period as may be 25
specified by regulations.
(4) Every grant of registration to a market infrastructure institution under this
section shall be notified by the Board, and such registration shall have effect from
the date of its notification.
(5) No application for registration under this section shall be refused unless 30
an opportunity of being heard is given to the applicant and the reasons for such
refusal shall be communicated in writing.
Cancellation of 38. (1) Without prejudice to clause (a) of section 20, if the Board is of the
registration or opinion that the registration granted to a market infrastructure institution under
suspension of sub-section (4) of section 37, in the interest of trade or in public interest be cancelled, 35
business.
the Board may by order cancel the registration in such manner as may be specified by
regulations, and it shall notify cancellation of such certificate of registration:
Provided that no order shall be made unless the applicant has been given an
opportunity of being heard.
(2) No cancellation under sub-section (1) shall affect the validity of any 40
contract entered into or made before the date of the notification, and the Board
may after consultation with the market infrastructure institution, make such
provisions as it deem fit in the notification of cancellation or in any subsequent
notification for the due performance of any contracts outstanding on that date.
(3) Without prejudice to sub-section (1), if in the opinion of the Board an 45
emergency has arisen and the Board considers it expedient for the purpose of
meeting the emergency, it may by notification and for reasons to be specified
therein, direct a market infrastructure institution to suspend such of its business for
such period not exceeding ninety days, subject to such conditions specified therein,
and, if, in the opinion of the Board, the interest of trade or public interest requires 50
that the period should be extended, it may, by a similar notification extend the said
period for a further period of ninety days:
25
Provided that where the period of suspension is to be extended beyond the
first period, no notification extending the period of suspension shall be issued,
unless the governing board of the market infrastructure institution has been given
an opportunity of being heard in the matter.
5 39. (1) A market infrastructure institution may, subject to the previous Power of market
approval of the Board, make bye-laws consistent with the provisions of this Code infrastructure
institution to
and any rules or regulations made thereunder, for the regulation and control of
make bye-laws.
contracts and conduct of its members and market participants.
(2) In particular, and without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing
10 powers, such bye-laws may provide for the following matters, namely:—
(a) the appropriate mechanisms for safeguarding the interests of any
investors in securities and beneficial owners thereof;
(b) the manner of holding, custody, pledging, hypothecation, lending,
borrowing, issue, transfer, trading, transmission, conversion, transformation,
15 consolidation, switching, clearing, delivery, settlement and other dealings in
securities;
(c) the risk management and abuse prevention measures such as
imposition of margins, position and price limits, circuit breakers, collateral
management, auction of short positions, order restrictions, account
20 suspensions, server placement and other technical requirements;
(d) the particular bye-laws, the contravention of which shall make a
contract entered into otherwise than in accordance with the bye-laws void
under section 47;
(e) the terms and conditions for accessing any services provided by the
25 market infrastructure institution;
(f) the listing of securities, the inclusion of any security for the purpose
of dealings and the suspension or withdrawal of any such securities, and the
suspension or prohibition of trading in securities;
(g) the procedure for disbursing of interest, dividend, bonus and other
30 monetary benefits arising from the holding, transfer, or any dealings in
securities;
(h) the norms of fair and time-bound disclosure of material information
by issuers;
(i) the internal control standards such as audits, review and monitoring;
35 (j) the inter se rights and obligations of members and market
participants;
(k) the terms, conditions and incidents of contracts, including the
prescription of margin requirements, if any, and the conditions relating
thereto, and the forms of contracts in writing;
(l) the content, form and manner of executing member-client
40
agreements;
(m) the measures relating to regulation of fees charged by members,
dealings by members for their own account, maintenance of separation of
client funds and securities;
45 (n) the process of accrediting or empanelling persons providing
services in connection with any dealings in securities;
(o) the procedure for conveying information to members and market
participants;
26
(p) the levy and recovery of fees and penalties;
(q) the conduct of inspections, filing of information and such other
matters in relation to regulation of its members;
(r) the obligations of members to supply such information or
explanation and to produce such documents relating to their business as may 5
be sought by the market infrastructure institution;
(s) the procedure for the settlement of claims or disputes or grievances
including settlement by mediation or arbitration including through electronic
means;
(t) the manner of conducting proceedings against the members and 10
market participants for committing breach of the bye-laws and provisions for
suspension, expulsion of members and market participants and cancellation
of agreements with the market infrastructure institution;
(u) such other matters as may be specified by regulations.
(3) The bye-laws of a market infrastructure institution shall endeavour to,— 15
(a) promote the objects of this Code;
(b) ensure non-discriminatory access to similarly placed persons using
its services;
(c) minimise market abuse, fraudulent and unfair practices related to
the securities markets; 20
(d) foster transparency; and
(e) ensure interoperability with other market infrastructure institutions.
Explanation.—For the purposes of this sub-section, the expressions,––
(i) “non-discriminatory access” means not creating differential obligations
for similarly placed persons or not preventing similarly placed persons from 25
availing a service provided by the market infrastructure institution; and
(ii) “transparency” means that adequate information about the functions
and transactions carried out on the market infrastructure institution is
available to all the persons availing the services provided by it to enable them
to make informed decisions about their transactions.
(4) Any bye-laws made under this section shall be subject to public 30
consultation and be approved and notified by the Board:
Provided that the Board in the interest of trade or in public interest may, by
an order and for the reasons to be recorded in writing, dispense with the condition
of public consultation.
(5) The Board may either on a request in writing received by it from the 35
governing board of a market infrastructure institution or on its own motion, may
after consultation with the governing board, make or amend bye-laws for all or any
of the matters specified in sub-section (2), after recording the reasons thereof.
Power of Board 40. (1) Where, after consultation with the governing bodies of market
to direct bye- infrastructure institution generally or with the governing body of any market 40
laws to be made
infrastructure institution in particular, the Board is of the opinion that it is
or to make bye-
laws. necessary or expedient so to do, it may, by order in writing together with a
statement of the reasons therefor, direct market infrastructure institution generally
or any market infrastructure institution in particular, as the case may be, to make
any bye-laws or to amend any bye-laws already made in respect of all or any of the 45
matters specified in sub-section (2) of section 39 within a period of two months
from the date of the order.
27
(2) If any market infrastructure institution fails or neglects to comply with any
order made under sub-section (1) within the period specified therein, the Board may
make the bye-laws or amend the bye-laws made by the market infrastructure institution
either in the form proposed in the order or with such modifications thereof, as may be
5 agreed to between the market infrastructure institution and the Board.
(3) Where in pursuance of this section any bye-laws have been made or
amended, the bye-laws so made or amended shall be published in the Official
Gazette, and, on the publication thereof, the bye-laws so made or amended shall,
18 of 2013. notwithstanding anything to the contrary contained in the Companies Act, 2013, or
10 in any other law for the time being in force, have effect, as if they had been made
or amended by the market infrastructure institution.
41. (1) Where a member contravenes any provision of the bye-laws, the Action for
market infrastructure institution may, by an order take one or more of the contravention of
bye-laws.
following actions against such member, namely:—
15 (a) impose penalty;
(b) expel from membership;
(c) suspend from membership for a period specified therein;
(d) annul any transactions or contracts;
(e) direct to pay compensation to the affected party;
(f) suspend or freeze account, collaterals, or security deposits under the
20
management of market infrastructure institution; and
(g) any other similar action not involving the payment of money:
Provided that before passing an order under clauses (b) to (g), an opportunity
of being heard shall be given to such member.
25 (2) The market infrastructure institution shall have the mechanisms to,—
(a) monitor and identify contravention of the provisions of this Code
and the rules or regulations or bye-laws made thereunder;
(b) inform the Board of any such contraventions;
(c) take measures including imposition of penalty, against such member
30 or market participant who contravenes the bye-laws;
(d) undertake such other matters,
as may be specified by regulations.
42. (1) A market infrastructure institution shall have diversified ownership by Ownership norms
way of shareholding, subject to the following conditions,–– of market
infrastructure
35 (a) the members of a market infrastructure institution shall not institution.
collectively own more than such percentage of the equity shareholding in
market infrastructure institution;
(b) such maximum ownership interest is held by a class or classes of
persons in a market infrastructure institution;
(c) such percentage of the total equity shareholding in a market
40
infrastructure institution is held by a person;
(d) such ownership interest of different class or classes of persons is
calculated and the manner of calculation thereof;
(e) such levels of cross holding of a market infrastructure institution in
45 other market infrastructure institutions and the acquisition or takeover or merger
or consolidation of business amongst market infrastructure institution;
28
(f) such period within which compliance of the ownership norms, may
be achieved; and
(g) such other diversified ownership norms,
as may be specified by regulations.
(2) A market infrastructure institution shall be managed in such manner 5
that,––
(a) the members of the governing board are eligible and qualified, and
meet the fit and proper criteria;
(b) the independent members are appointed on the governing board;
(c) any class or classes of market participants or users are appointed on 10
the governing board; and
(d) other appropriate measures are undertaken for ensuring good
governance to avoid any conflict of interest,
as may be specified by regulations.
(3) A market infrastructure institution shall be a company limited by shares 15
and shall be demutualised in such manner as may be specified by regulations.
Explanation.—For the purposes of this sub-section, the expressions,—
(i) “company limited by shares” shall have the same meaning as
assigned to it in clause (22) of section 2 of the Companies Act, 2013; 18 of 2013.
(ii) “demutualised” means segregation of the ownership and 20
management from the trading rights or clearing rights, or such other
operational rights of the members of a market infrastructure institution, as the
case may be.
(4) The provisions of this section shall apply notwithstanding anything to the
contrary contained in the Competition Act, 2002 or the Companies Act, 2013. 25 12 of 2003.
18 of 2013.
Annual report. 43. A market infrastructure institution shall furnish a copy of its annual
report and other information to the Board in such manner as may be specified by
regulations.
Power of Central 44. (1) Without prejudice to any other powers vested in the Central
Government to Government under this Code, where the Central Government, on the 30
supersede.
recommendation of the Board, is of the opinion that the governing board of a
market infrastructure institution or a self-regulatory organisation should be
superseded, then, notwithstanding anything contained in any other law for the time
being in force, it may serve on the governing board a written notice that it is
considering the supersession of the governing board for the reasons specified in the 35
notice and after giving an opportunity of being heard, it may, by notification,
declare the governing board of such market infrastructure institution or
self-regulatory organisation to be superseded, and may appoint any person or
persons to exercise and perform all the powers and duties of the governing board,
and, where more persons than one person are appointed, may appoint one of such 40
persons to be the chairperson and another to be the vice-chairperson thereof.
(2) On the publication of a notification under sub-section (1), the following
consequences shall ensue, namely:—
(a) the members of the governing board which has been superseded
shall, from the date of supersession, cease to hold office as such members; 45
(b) the person or persons appointed under sub-section (1) may exercise
and perform all the powers and duties of the governing board which has been
superseded; and
29
(c) all such property of the market infrastructure institution or the
self-regulatory organisation shall vest in such person or persons under
sub-section (1) as being necessary for the purpose of enabling him or them to
carry on the business of the market infrastructure institution or
5 self-regulatory organisation.
(3) On the supersession of the board of a market infrastructure institution or
self-regulatory organisation under sub-section (1), the person or persons appointed
shall hold office for such period as may be specified in the notification and the
Central Government may from time to time, by like notification, vary such period.
10 (4) The Central Government may at any time before the determination of the
period of office of any person or persons appointed under this section, call upon
the market infrastructure institution or the self-regulatory organisation to
re-constitute the governing board in accordance with its bye-laws and on such
re-constitution, all the property of the market infrastructure institution or
15 self-regulatory organisation which has vested in, or was in the possession of, the
person or persons appointed under sub-section (1), shall re-vest or vest, as the case
may be, in the governing board so re-constituted:
Provided that until a governing board is so re-constituted, the person or
persons appointed under sub-section (1) shall continue to exercise the powers and
20 perform the duties.
CHAPTER VI
REGULATION OF CONTRACTS
45. (1) Unless otherwise permitted under this Code and the rules or Contracts to be
regulations made thereunder or any other law for the time being in force, every illegal in certain
circumstances.
25 contract for sale or purchase of securities, which is entered into otherwise than
between members of a stock exchange or stock exchanges or through or with such
member, shall be illegal:
Provided that the Central Government may notify any contract, which may
be entered into otherwise than between members of a stock exchange or stock
30 exchanges or through or with such member, to be legal.
(2) Any contract entered into between members of two or more stock
exchanges shall—
(a) be subject to such terms and conditions as may be specified by the
respective stock exchanges with the prior approval of the Board; and
(b) require prior permission from the respective stock exchanges, if so,
35
specified by the stock exchanges with the prior approval of the Board.
(3) If the Central Government is satisfied that having regard to the nature or
the volume of transactions in securities, it is necessary to prohibit contracts in
certain cases, it may by notification, declare that no person shall, without the
40 permission of the Central Government, enter into any contract for the sale or
purchase of any security specified in the notification, except to the extent and in
the manner, if any, specified therein.
(4) All contracts in contravention of the provisions of sub-section (3) entered
into after the date of the notification issued thereunder shall be illegal.
45 46. Notwithstanding anything contained in any other law for the time being Validity of
in force, any contract including contracts that are traded on a stock exchange or contracts.
settled on a clearing corporation shall be legal and valid, if such contracts are made
in accordance with the provisions of this Code and the rules or regulations or
bye-laws made thereunder.
30
Contracts in 47. Any contract which is in contravention of any bye-laws of a stock
contravention of exchange specified in that behalf shall be void under clause (d) of
bye-laws to be
void. sub-section (2) of section 39 with respect to,—
(a) the rights of any member of the stock exchange who has entered
into such contract in contravention of such bye-laws; and 5
(b) the rights of any other person who has knowingly participated in
the transaction entailing such contravention:
Provided that nothing in this section shall be construed to affect the rights
of a person other than a member of the stock exchange to enforce any such
contract or to recover any sum under or in respect of such contract, if such 10
person had no knowledge that the transaction was in contravention of any of
the bye-laws specified in clause (d) of sub-section (2) of section 39.
Exemptions for 48. Notwithstanding anything contained in this Code or any other law for
certain contracts. the time being in force, a contract for sale or purchase of or other dealings in
securities falling under any one or more clauses mentioned hereunder, shall not 15
be deemed to be illegal and nothing in this Code shall be construed as requiring
any person or persons desirous of entering into such contracts to obtain prior
permission of the Board,—
(a) a spot delivery contract;
(b) a non-transferable specific delivery contract; 20
(c) contracts for pre-emption including right of first refusal, or
tag-along or drag-along rights or such other similar rights contained in
shareholders agreements or any investor agreement or articles of
association of companies or other body corporate;
(d) contracts in shareholders agreements or articles of association of 25
companies or other body corporate, for purchase or sale of securities
pursuant to exercise of an option contained therein to buy or sell the
securities, where—
(i) the title and ownership of the underlying securities is held
continuously by the selling party to such contract for a minimum 30
period of one year from the date of entering into the contract;
(ii) the price or consideration payable for the sale or purchase
of the underlying securities pursuant to exercise of any option
contained therein is in compliance with the laws for the time being
in force as applicable; and 35
(iii) the contract is settled by way of actual delivery of the
underlying securities;
(e) standing agreements or arrangements for delivery or supply of
commodities;
(f) contracts, including derivatives under the provisions of 4 0
Chapter IIID of the Reserve Bank of India Act, 1934; or 2 of 1934.
(g) contracts between such parties relating to such matters, on such
terms and conditions as the Central Government may by notification specify.
Derivatives in 49. The Central Government may in consultation with the Board, notify
respect of such commodities in respect of which a derivative may be entered into or made 45
commodity.
by any person.
31
50. (1) If the Central Government is of the opinion that in the interest of trade Non-transferable
specific delivery
or in public interest, it is expedient to regulate and control non-transferable specific
contract, spot
delivery contracts in commodities or securities or the business of dealing in spot delivery contract
delivery contracts, it may, by notification, declare that all or any of the provisions and transferable
5 of this Code shall apply to,–– specific delivery
contract.
(a) such class or classes of non-transferable specific delivery contracts
in respect of such commodities or securities or class of commodities or
securities;
(b) such class or classes of spot delivery contracts for the sale or
10 purchase of such securities,
as may be specified therein.
Explanation.––For the purposes of this Chapter, the expressions,––
(i) “specific delivery contract” means a derivative which provides for the
actual delivery of specific qualities or types of underlying during a stipulated
15 future period at a price fixed thereby or to be fixed in the manner thereby agreed
and in which names of both the buyer and the seller are mentioned;
(ii) “non-transferable specific delivery contract” means a specific
delivery contract, the rights or liabilities under which or under any delivery
order, railway receipt, bill of lading, warehouse receipt or any other
20 documents of title relating thereto are not transferable;
(iii) “spot delivery contract” means a contract which is not executed on
a stock exchange and provides for,—
(a) actual delivery of securities and the payment of price, either
on the same day as the date of the contract or on the next day, the
25
actual period taken for the despatch of the securities or the remittance
of money through post being excluded from the computation of the
period aforesaid, if the parties to the contract do not reside in the same
town or locality; or
(b) the delivery of commodities and the payment of price, either
30 immediately, or within such period not exceeding eleven days after the
date of the contract inclusive of the actual period taken for the despatch
of the commodities through post or road or any such physical means
and subject to such conditions as the Central Government may notify in
respect of any commodities, and where the period under such contract
35 is not being capable of extension by the mutual consent of the parties
thereto or otherwise, but shall not include such contracts performed
either wholly or in part,––
(i) by realisation of any sum of money being the difference
between the contract rate and the settlement rate or clearing rate
40 or the rate of any offsetting contract; or
(ii) by any other means whatsoever, and as a result of which
the actual tendering of the goods covered by the contract or
payment of the full price therefor is dispensed with.
(2) A transferable specific delivery contract shall be subject to the provisions
45 of this Code and shall be entered into or made on a stock exchange except for such
2 of 1934. contracts specified under Chapter IIID of the Reserve Bank of India Act, 1934.
Explanation.––For the purposes of this Chapter, “transferable specific
delivery contract” means a specific delivery contract, which is not a non-
transferable specific delivery contract and is subject to such conditions relating to
50 its transferability as may be notified by the Central Government.
32
Prohibition of 51. No person shall organise or assist in organising or become a member of
performance of
any association or entity in any area which provides facilities for the performance
contracts without
registration. of any contracts in securities, without being registered with the Board or permitted
under Chapter IIID of the Reserve Bank of India Act, 1934 or specifically 2 of 1934.
exempted by the Central Government by notification. 5
Manner of 52. (1) No person shall deal in securities on a market infrastructure institution
dealing in unless it is admitted as a member or a client of a member or a principal, in such
securities
manner as may be specified by regulations or bye-laws.
through market
infrastructure
institution. (2) No member shall in respect of any securities enter into any contract as a
principal with any person other than a member, unless it has secured the consent or 10
authority of such person and discloses in the note, the memorandum or the
agreement of sale or purchase that it is acting as a principal:
Provided that where the member has secured the consent or authority of such
person otherwise than in writing, he shall secure written confirmation by such
person or such consent or authority within three days from the date of the contract: 15
Provided further that no such written consent or authority of such person
shall be necessary for closing out any outstanding contract entered into by such
person in accordance with the bye-laws, if the member discloses in the note, the
memorandum or the agreement of sale or purchase in respect of such closing out
that it is acting as a principal. 20
Rights of holder 53. (1) It shall be lawful for the holder of any security whose name appears
of securities to on the books of the issuer issuing the said security to receive and retain any
dividends and
dividend or profit or income or return of any kind declared by the issuer in respect
income in
respect of thereof for any year, irrespective of the said security that has already been
securities. transferred by it for consideration, unless the transferee who claims such dividend 25
or profit or income or return from the transferor has lodged the security and all
other documents relating to the transfer which may be required by the issuer, with
the issuer for being registered in its name within a period of fifteen days of the date
on which the dividend or profit or income or return became due.
(2) The period specified in sub-section (1) shall be extended,— 30
(a) in case of death of the transferee, by the actual period taken by his
legal representative to establish his claim to the dividend or profit or income
or return;
(b) in case of loss of the transfer deed by theft or any other cause
beyond the control of the transferee, by the actual period taken for the 35
replacement thereof; and
(c) in case of delay in the lodging of any security and other documents
relating to the transfer due to reasons connected with the post, by the actual
period of the delay.
(3) Nothing contained in sub-section (1) shall affect,— 40
(a) the right of an issuer to pay any dividend or profit or income or
return which has become due to any person whose name is for the time being
registered in the books of the issuer as the holder of the security in respect of
which the dividend or profit or income or return has become due; or
(b) the right of the transferee of any security to enforce against the 45
transferor or any other person his rights, if any, in relation to the transfer in
any case where the issuer has refused to register the transfer of the security in
the name of the transferee.
33
CHAPTER VII
HOLDING OF SECURITIES
54. (1) The powers of the Board shall extend to,—
Power of Board
in respect of
depository
(a) depository services provided by a depository; and
services.
5 (b) any other regulated instrument, subject to such conditions and
procedures as may be specified by regulations, for the issuance and holding of
other regulated instrument through depositories, subject to the provisions
contained in section 118.
(2) Nothing contained in this Chapter shall apply to Government security
10 unless an agreement is executed to the contrary by any depository with the
Government or Reserve Bank, as the case may be, under the provisions of the
38 of 2006. Government Securities Act, 2006 and the Reserve Bank of India Act, 1934.
2 of 1934.
55. (1) All securities or other regulated instrument held by a depository shall Securities to be
in dematerialised
be dematerialised and in a fungible form.
and fungible
form.
15 (2) Every issuer offering securities for subscription to any person shall allot
such securities in dematerialised form and every person subscribing to securities
offered by an issuer shall hold such securities with a depository:
Provided that nothing shall affect the rights of a person to continue holding
previously issued securities in physical form after the date of commencement of the
20 Code unless such person intends to sell or transfer such securities, in which case,
such securities shall have to be dematerialised first.
(3) Where securities are held with a depository under sub-section (2), the
issuer shall inform such depository regarding the details of allotment of the security,
and on receipt of such information the depository shall enter the name of the allottee
25 as the beneficial owner of that security in its records.
(4) Nothing contained in sections 88 and 89 of the Companies Act, 2013, shall
18 of 2013.
apply to a depository in respect of securities or other regulated instrument held by
it on behalf of the beneficial owners.
56. (1) Any person who has entered into an agreement through a depository Process of
30 participant, in the form specified by the bye-laws, with any depository for availing dematerialisation.
its services, shall surrender the certificate of security or other regulated instrument
for which he seeks to avail the services of a depository, to the issuer of such security
or other regulated instrument in such manner as may be specified by regulations.
(2) The issuer of such security or other regulated instrument, on receipt of
35 certificate of security or other regulated instrument under sub-section (1), shall
cancel such certificate or instrument and enter the name of the depository in respect
of that security or other regulated instrument in its records and inform the depository
within such period as may be specified by regulations.
(3) A depository shall, on receipt of information under sub-section (2), enter
40 the name of the person referred to in sub-section (1) in its records, as the beneficial
owner.
(4) A depository shall dematerialise the certificate of securities within such
period as may be specified by regulations.
57. Every depository shall maintain a register and an index of beneficial Depository to
45 owners in the manner provided in section 88 of the Companies Act, 2013 and maintain a
18 of 2013. Register of
maintain any other particulars as may be specified by regulations or required by any
beneficial
other regulatory authority, where applicable. owners.
34
Registration of 58. (1) Every depository shall on receipt of information from a depository
transfer of
participant register the transfer of security or other regulated instrument in the name
security, etc.
of the transferee.
(2) The records of a depository in respect of any security or other regulated
instrument shall be conclusive proof of title of the transferee over such security or 5
other regulated instrument, as the case may be.
(3) Every depository on receipt of information from a depository participant,
register any transfer of security in favour of an asset reconstruction company along
with or consequent upon transfer or assignment of financial asset of any bank or
financial institution under sub-section (1) of section 5 of the Securitisation and 10
Reconstruction of Financial Assets and Enforcement of Security Interest Act, 2002. 54 of 2002.
(4) Every depository, on receipt of information from a depository
participant, register any issue of new shares in favour of any bank or financial
institution or asset reconstruction company or any other assignee of such bank or
financial institution or asset reconstruction company, as the case may be, by 15
conversion of part of their debt into shares pursuant to reconstruction of debt of
the company agreed between the company and the bank or financial institution or
asset reconstruction company.
Explanation.––For the purposes of this section, the expressions “asset
reconstruction company”, “bank”, and “financial institution” shall have the same 20
meanings as assigned to them respectively in clauses (ba), (c) and (m) of
sub-section (1) of section 2 of the Securitisation and Reconstruction of Financial
Assets and Enforcement of Security Interest Act, 2002. 54 of 2002.
Pledge or 59. (1) Subject to such regulations and bye-laws, as may be made in this
hypothecation of
behalf, a beneficial owner may with the previous approval of the depository, create 25
securities or
other regulated a pledge or hypothecation in respect of a security or other regulated instrument
instrument held owned by it through a depository.
through
depository. (2) Every beneficial owner shall give information of such pledge or
hypothecation to the depository and such depository shall thereupon make entries
in its records accordingly and such entry shall be the conclusive proof of such pledge 30
or hypothecation, as the case may be.
Furnishing of 60. (1) Every depository shall furnish to the issuer, information about the
information and
transfer of securities or other regulated instruments in the name of beneficial owners
records by
depository and at such intervals and in such manner as may be provided by the bye-laws.
issuer.
(2) Every issuer shall make available to the depository, copies of the relevant 35
records in respect of securities or other regulated instrument held by such
depository.
Rights of 61. (1) Notwithstanding anything contained in any other law for the time being
registered owner in force, a depository shall be deemed to be the registered owner for the purposes of
and beneficial
effecting transfer of ownership of security or other regulated instrument on behalf 40
owner.
of a beneficial owner.
Explanation.––For the purposes of this section, the registered owner is a
depository whose name has been entered as such in the register of the issuer.
(2) Save as otherwise provided in sub-section (1), the depository as a
registered owner shall not have any voting rights or any other rights in respect of 45
securities or other regulated instrument held by it.
(3) The beneficial owner shall be entitled to all the rights and benefits and be
subject to all the liabilities in respect of its securities or other regulated instrument
held by a depository.
35
62. (1) Subject to the provisions of this Code, the rights and obligations of the Rights and
obligations of
depositories, depository participants and the issuers whose securities or other
depository.
regulated instrument are dealt with by a depository shall be such as may be specified
by regulations.
5 (2) The eligibility criteria for admission of securities or other regulated
instrument into a depository and the manner of holding and transfer of such
securities and other regulated instrument shall be such as may be specified by
regulations.
(3) The manner of exercising the rights and interest in or arising from any
10 securities or other regulated instrument held with the depository and any other
connected operational or incidental matters shall be such as may be specified by
regulations.
(4) Every depository shall maintain records relating to the beneficial owners
of all securities or other regulated instrument held with it including records of clients
15 of any depository participants in such manner as may be specified by regulations.
(5) Every depository shall adopt such procedures to prevent misappropriation
of, or unauthorised access to, any securities or other regulated instrument held with
it and shall adopt such good practices as may be specified by regulations for
safeguarding the interests of the beneficial owners.
20 (6) Without prejudice to the provisions contained in any other law for the time
being in force, the depository shall indemnify such beneficial owner for any loss
caused to the beneficial owner due to the negligence of the depository or its member.
(7) Where the depository has indemnified due to the negligence of its member
under sub-section (6), it shall have the right to recover the same from such member.
18 of 1891. 25 63. The Bankers’ Books Evidence Act, 1891 shall apply in relation to a Bankers’ Books
depository as if it were a bank as defined in clause (2) of section 2 of that Act. Evidence
Act, 1891 to
apply to
depositories.
CHAPTER VIII
LISTING AND DELISTING OF SECURITIES
30 64. (1) Without prejudice to the provisions of this Code or any other law for Public issue and
listing of
the time being in force, no securities shall be offered to the public or listed on a
securities.
stock exchange unless the issuer fulfils such eligibility criteria and complies with
such requirements as may be specified by regulations.
(2) Every issuer intending to offer securities to the public or for listing, before
35 issuing the offer document, shall make an application to each stock exchange for
permission to list and shall comply with such conditions as may be specified by
regulations.
(3) Where securities are listed on any stock exchange, such person shall
comply with the conditions of the listing agreement with that stock exchange and
such other conditions as may be specified by regulations.
40 (4) Where the permission under sub-section (2) has not been granted or
refused, the issuer shall forthwith repay all money, if any, received from the
applicant within such period and in such manner as may be specified by regulations
and the issuer and every director or trustee thereof, as the case may be, who is in
default shall be jointly and severally liable to repay that money.
45 (5) The Board may, by general or special order,—
(a) prohibit any company from issuing prospectus, any offer document, or
advertisement soliciting money from the public for the issue of securities; or
36
(b) specify the conditions subject to which the prospectus, the offer
document or advertisement, if not prohibited, may be issued.
Listing and 65. (1) The requirements for issuer in matters relating to issue of capital,
d
re
i
q
sc
u
l
i
o
r
s
e
u
m
re
e nts.
minimum offer size, issue and transfer of securities, corporate governance
requirements, disclosures by issuers, substantial acquisition of shares and take-over
5
of companies, public shareholding norms, concentration norms and prudential
norms, risk management and any other matters incidental thereto may be such, as
may be specified by regulations.
(2) Without prejudice to anything contained in sub-section (1), the Central
Government may by notification in the public interest, exempt any listed public 10
sector company from any or all of the requirements specified in sub-section (1).
Explanation.––For the purposes of this sub-section, “public sector company”
means a body corporate constituted by an Act of Parliament or any State Legislature
and includes a Government company as defined in clause (45) of section 2 of the
Companies Act, 2013. 15 18 of 2013.
Delisting of 66. (1) An issuer may apply to stock exchange to get its securities delisted
securities. from such stock exchange in such manner as may be specified by regulations.
(2) Without prejudice to sub-section (1), a stock exchange may delist the
securities of an issuer, after recording the reasons therefor, for continued
contravention of any listing conditions or on any of the grounds as may be specified 20
by regulations:
Provided that the securities of an issuer shall not be delisted unless such issuer
has been given an opportunity of being heard.
Refusal for 67. Where a stock exchange refuses to list or delist the securities of an issuer,
listing or such stock exchange shall furnish reasons for such refusal to such issuer in writing. 25
delisting of
securities. CHAPTER IX
NETTING AND SETTLEMENT
Netting and 68. (1) Notwithstanding anything contained in any other law for the time being
settlement. in force,—
(a) the settlement of transactions undertaken on a stock exchange or 30
clearing corporation shall be conducted in accordance with the settlement
procedure, including netting or gross settlement, as specified in the bye-laws
of such stock exchange or clearing corporation, as the case may be, with the
prior approval of the Board; and
(b) a settlement, whether gross or net, effected under clause (a) shall be 35
final and irrevocable as soon as the money, securities or other assets payable
is determined, whether or not such money, securities or other assets are
actually paid.
(2) Where a trading member, a clearing member or any of their clients is
declared by a court of competent jurisdiction or tribunal as insolvent or is dissolved, 40
wound-up or resolved, or a liquidator, an interim resolution professional, a
resolution professional, an administrator, receiver or assignee, by whatever name
called, whether provisional or otherwise, is appointed in a proceeding relating to
insolvency, resolution or dissolution or winding-up of such member, then,––
(a) any order of adjudication, dissolution, winding-up, or resolution, as 45
the case may be, shall not affect any settlement that has become final and
irrevocable under sub-section (1); and
37
(b) the right of a clearing corporation or stock exchange, as the case may
be, to appropriate any collaterals or deposits or margins contributed by the
said trading member or clearing member or client towards its settlement or
other obligations, in accordance with the bye-laws of such stock exchange or
5 clearing corporation, as the case may be, shall remain unaffected.
(3) Where an order referred to in clause (a) of sub-section (2) is made with
respect to a clearing corporation or a stock exchange, as the case may be, then,
irrespective of such order or anything in any other law for the time being in force,
the payment obligations and settlement instructions between the clearing
10 corporation and the clearing members including those arising from transactions
admitted for settlement at a future date, shall be determined forthwith by the clearing
corporation, in accordance with the gross settlement or netting procedure, as the
case may be, under the bye-laws of such clearing corporation, and such
determination shall be final and irrevocable.
15 (4) Notwithstanding anything contained in any other law for the time being in
force, any resolution professional, liquidator, administrator, receiver or assignee, by
whatever name called, of a clearing corporation, whether appointed provisionally or
otherwise, shall—
(a) not re-open any determination that has become final and irrevocable
20 under sub-section (3);
(b) after appropriating in accordance with the bye-laws of the clearing
corporation, the collaterals provided by the clearing members towards their
settlement or other obligations, return the collaterals held in excess to the
clearing members concerned; and
25 (c) while distributing any assets, apply the assets in priority against the
dues arising out of settlement obligations of the clearing corporation and
thereafter apply the assets against third party claims.
Explanation.––For the purposes of this section, the expressions––
(i) “netting” means the determination by a clearing corporation of—
(A) net payment;
30
(B) delivery obligations of the clearing members by setting off;
(C) adjustment of the inter-se obligations, claims arising out of
buying and selling of securities, including the claims and obligations
arising out of the determination by the clearing corporation, a stock
exchange, on the insolvency, winding-up, liquidation or resolution of
35
any clearing member, trading member or client; or
(D) such other circumstances of the transactions admitted for
settlement at a future date so that only a net claim be demanded, or a net
obligation be owed as the clearing corporation may specify in its
40
bye-laws;
(ii) “resolution professional” shall have the same meaning as assigned to
31 of 2016. it in the Insolvency and Bankruptcy Code, 2016 and “liquidator” shall have
18 of 2013. the same meaning as assigned to it in the Companies Act, 2013 and the
Insolvency and Bankruptcy Code, 2016.
45 69. A market infrastructure institution shall implement delivery arrangements Delivery
in respect of contracts in securities including derivatives, in such form and manner arrangements of
contracts in
as may be specified by regulations.
securities.
38
Right of a 70. Subject to the provisions of the Insolvency and Bankruptcy Code, 2016, 31 of 2016.
clearing
the right of a clearing corporation to recover its dues from the clearing members,
corporation shall
have precedence incurred in discharge of their clearing and settlement functions from the collaterals,
over other right deposits and other assets of clearing members held by the clearing corporation for
and attachments. this purpose shall,–– 5
(a) in case of insolvency, winding-up, liquidation or resolution, as the
case may be, of such clearing member, have precedence over the rights of any
other person in such insolvency, winding-up, liquidation or resolution
proceedings;
(b) to the extent of the claims of the clearing corporation, have priority 10
over any other attachment by any authority constituted under any law for the
time being in force.
CHAPTER X
INVESTOR CHARTER AND INVESTOR GRIEVANCE REDRESSAL MECHANISMS
Investor charter. 71. The Board may make an investor charter which shall provide for the 15
principles for protection of investors and facilitate their participation in the
securities markets, and such other matters concerning the investors, in such manner
as may be specified by regulations.
Investor 72. (1) The Board may provide for an investor grievance redressal mechanism
grievance
and direct securities markets service provider or issuer or its agent to provide for 20
redressal
similar mechanisms to receive, monitor and redress investor grievances in such
mechanism.
manner and within such period, as may be specified by regulations.
(2) Upon receipt of a grievance from an investor as per the mechanism
provided under sub-section (1), the Board, the securities markets service provider,
or the issuer shall, within such period as may be specified by regulations, not 25
exceeding seven days, inform the investor about the receipt of the grievance.
Board to 73. (1) The Board may designate one or more of its officers as Ombudsperson
designate to receive and redress grievances of investors under this Chapter.
Ombudsperson
to redress (2) The Ombudsperson shall sit at such places having jurisdiction over such
grievances.
areas as the Board may notify in this behalf. 30
(3) The Ombudsperson shall redress the grievances in such manner, subject to
such timelines, as may be specified by regulations.
Procedure for
74. (1) Any investor aggrieved by the deficiency in services rendered by a
filing of securities markets service provider or any act or omission of an issuer, shall resolve
grievance and his grievance through the investor grievance redressal mechanisms referred to in
35
complaint.
section 72 within a period of one hundred and eighty days from the date of first
filing of such grievance.
(2) If the grievance of investor is not resolved within the period specified
above, he may file a complaint in writing with the Ombudsperson within a period
of thirty days in such form and manner as may be specified by regulations: 40
Provided that no complaint shall be maintainable where the investor has
initiated a proceeding before any court, tribunal, or authority in respect of a matter
which is directly or substantially in issue of such complaint.
Explanation.––For the purposes of this sub-section, the expression
“deficiency” means any fault, imperfection, shortcoming or inadequacy in the 45
quality, nature and manner of performance which is required to be maintained by or
under this Code, or any rules and regulations made thereunder, or has been
undertaken to be performed by a securities markets service provider in pursuance of
a contract or otherwise in relation to any service in the securities markets and
includes— 50
39
(i) any act of negligence or omission or commission by such person
which causes loss or injury to the investor; and
(ii) deliberate withholding of relevant information by such person to the
investor.
5 (3) Any proceeding before the investor grievance redressal mechanisms under
section 72 shall abate on filing of the complaint with the Ombudsperson.
75. (1) Where the Ombudsperson is satisfied that the averments contained in Order of
Ombudsperson.
the complaint are true, he shall redress the complaint and may, by an order in
writing, direct the respondent to—
10 (a) comply with its obligations;
(b) return the fees, charges or such other amount to the complainant,
jointly or severally; or
(c) pay such amount as damages to the complainant as may be specified
by regulations:
15 Provided that no order shall be passed unless the complainant and the
respondent have been given an opportunity of being heard.
(2) Any order made under sub-section (1) shall be binding on the complainant
and the respondent.
76. At the time of redressal of complaint, if the Ombudsperson is of the Ombudsperson
to inform Board
20 opinion that the respondent has contravened any of the provisions of this Code or
regarding
the rules or regulations made thereunder, he may inform the Board of such
contravention of
contravention. Code.
77. While exercising the powers under this Code, the Ombudsperson shall Ombudsperson
have the same powers as are vested in a civil court under the Code of Civil
t
p
o
o w
ha
e
v
r
e
s o
ce
f
r
c
t
i
a
v
in
il
5 of 1908. 25 Procedure, 1908 while trying a suit, in respect of the following matters, namely:— court.
(a) discovery and inspection of documents;
(b) summoning and enforcing the attendance of any person and
examining him on oath;
(c) issuing commissions for the examination of witnesses and
30 compelling production of books of account and other records; and
(d) dismissing an application for default or deciding it ex parte.
78. No order made by the Ombudsperson shall bar the Board from taking any Orders of
other action under this Code. Ombudsperson
not to bar Board
from taking any
action.
CHAPTER XI
35 SECURITIES APPELLATE TRIBUNAL
79. The Securities Appellate Tribunal established under section 15K of the Securities
Appellate
15 of 1992. Securities and Exchange Board of India Act, 1992 shall be deemed to be the
Tribunal.
Securities Appellate Tribunal for the purposes of this Code.
80. (1) The Tribunal shall consist of a Presiding Officer and such number of Composition of
Tribunal and its
40 Judicial and Technical Members, as the Central Government may by notification
Benches.
determine, to exercise the powers and discharge the functions conferred on the
Tribunal under this Code or any other law for the time being in force.
(2) Subject to the provisions of this Code,—
40
(a) the jurisdiction, powers and authority of the Tribunal may be
exercised by Benches thereof;
(b) the Benches of the Tribunal shall ordinarily sit at Mumbai and at such
other places as the Central Government may, in consultation with the
Presiding Officer, notify; 5
(c) a Bench may be constituted by the Presiding Officer of the Tribunal
with two or more Judicial and Technical Members as he may deem fit:
Provided that every Bench shall consist of at least one Judicial and one
Technical Member:
Provided further that in the absence of a Technical Member due to vacancy, a 10
Bench may consist of the Presiding Officer and a Judicial Member.
Explanation.––For the purposes of sub-section (2), unless the context
otherwise requires, a reference to “Judicial Member” shall also include “Presiding
Officer”.
(3) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (2), the Presiding 15
Officer may transfer a Judicial or a Technical Member from one Bench to another
Bench.
Appointment, 81. (1) The appointment, qualifications, term of office, salaries and
qualifications, allowances, resignation, removal and the other terms and conditions of
t
c
e
o
r
n
m
d
s
it
a
io
n
n
d
s of service of the Presiding Officer and other Members of the Tribunal shall be 20
service of governed by the provisions of the law applicable to tribunals and the rules and
Presiding regulations made thereunder.
Officer and
Members. Explanation.––For the purposes of sub-section (1), unless the context
otherwise requires, “Member” means a Judicial Member and a Technical Member.
(2) On the date of commencement of this Code, the Presiding Officer and the 25
Member of the Tribunal, shall continue to hold such office under the corresponding
provisions of this Code till the completion of the remainder period, unless removed
under the provisions of the law applicable to tribunals and the rules and regulations
made thereunder.
(3) A Member of the Board referred to in sub-section (1) of section 4, or a 30
member or part-time member of the Insurance Regulatory and Development
Authority of India, the Pension Fund Regulatory and Development Authority or the
International Financial Services Centres Authority, or any person at senior
management level equivalent to the Executive Director of the Board or in such
Authorities, shall not be appointed as Member of the Tribunal, during his service or 35
tenure as such with the Board or with such Authorities, as the case may be, or within
a period of two years from the date on which he ceases to hold office as such in the
Board or in such Authorities.
Filling up of 82. If any vacancy occurs in the office of the Presiding Officer or any other
vacancies.
Member of the Tribunal, the Central Government shall appoint another person in 40
accordance with the provisions of the law applicable to tribunals and the rules and
regulations made thereunder to fill the vacancy and the proceedings may be
continued before the Tribunal from the stage at which the vacancy is filled.
Senior-most 83. If any vacancy occurs in the office of the Presiding Officer by reason of
Judicial Member his death, resignation or otherwise, the senior-most Judicial Member of the Tribunal 45
to act as
shall act as the Presiding Officer until the date on which a new Presiding Officer is
Presiding
Officer in certain appointed and assumes charge.
circumstances.
Officers and 84. (1) The Central Government shall provide the Tribunal with such officers
employees of and employees as it may deem fit.
Tribunal.
41
(2) The officers and employees of the Tribunal shall discharge their functions
under the general superintendence of the Presiding Officer.
(3) The salaries, allowances and other conditions of service of the officers and
employees of the Tribunal shall be such as may be prescribed.
5 85. (1) Any person aggrieved by,— Appeal to
Tribunal.
(a) an order passed under section 20;
(b) an order passed under sub-section (1) of section 21;
(c) an order passed under sub-sections (2) and (4) of section 27;
(d) an order passed or a decision made under clause (a) of
10 sub-section (1) of section 29 or sub-section (1) of section 38;
(e) an order passed under clause (b) of sub-section (3) of section 31;
(f) an order passed under sub-section (1) of section 75;
(g) an order passed or decision made by any market infrastructure
institution; or
15 (h) an order passed by the Insurance Regulatory and Development
Authority of India, the Pension Fund Regulatory and Development Authority
or the International Financial Services Centres Authority,
may prefer an appeal to the Tribunal having jurisdiction in the matter.
(2) Without prejudice to the provisions of sub-section (1), an appeal may be
20 preferred to the Tribunal in the matter by,—
(a) an issuer aggrieved by the decision of the stock exchange to refuse
to list the securities of such company under sub-section (4) of section 64; or
(b) an issuer or an investor aggrieved by the decision of the stock
exchange delisting the securities under sub-section (2) of section 66.
25 (3) Every appeal under sub-sections (1) and (2) shall be filed within a period
of forty-five days from the date on which a copy of the order made by the Board,
Insurance Regulatory and Development Authority of India, the Pension Fund
Regulatory and Development Authority, the International Financial Services
Centres Authority, Ombudsperson, adjudicating officer, self-regulatory
organisation or market infrastructure institution, as the case may be, is received by
30
the person aggrieved and shall be in such form, manner and be accompanied by such
fee as may be prescribed:
Provided that the Tribunal may entertain an appeal after the expiry of the said
period of forty-five days if it is satisfied that there was sufficient cause for not filing
35 it within that period.
(4) On receipt of an appeal under sub-sections (1) and (2), the Tribunal may,
after giving the parties to the appeal an opportunity of being heard, pass such orders
thereon as it thinks fit, confirming, modifying or setting aside the order, decision or
directions appealed against and provide a copy of such order free of cost to the
40 parties.
(5) The Tribunal may, under sub-section (4), grant permission for listing of
securities and a stock exchange shall act in conformity with the order of the
Tribunal.
(6) The appeal filed under sub-sections (1) and (2) shall be dealt expeditiously
45 and preferably be disposed of within a period of six months from the date of receipt
of the appeal.
42
Procedure and 86. (1) The Tribunal shall not be bound by the procedure laid down by the
powers of
Code of Civil Procedure, 1908, but shall be guided by the principles of natural 5 of 1908.
Tribunal.
justice and, subject to the provisions of this Code and the rules made thereunder,
shall have the powers to regulate its own procedure.
(2) The Tribunal shall have the same powers as are vested in a civil court under 5
the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908, while trying a suit in respect of the following 5 of 1908.
matters, namely:—
(a) summoning and enforcing the attendance of any person and
examining him on oath;
(b) requiring the discovery and production of documents; 10
(c) receiving evidence on affidavits;
(d) issuing commissions for the examination of witnesses or documents;
(e) reviewing its decisions;
(f) dismissing an application for default or deciding it ex parte;
(g) setting aside any order of dismissal of any application for default or 15
any order passed by it ex parte; and
(h) any other matter which may be prescribed.
(3) Every proceeding before the Tribunal shall be deemed to be a judicial
proceeding within the meaning of sections 229 and 267, and for the purposes of
section 233 of the Bharatiya Nyaya Sanhita, 2023 and the Tribunal shall be deemed 20 45 of 2023.
to be a civil court for all the purposes of section 215 and Chapter XXVIII of the
Bharatiya Nagarik Suraksha Sanhita, 2023. 46 of 2023.
(4) The Presiding Officer of the Tribunal may, from time to time make
provisions for the distribution of the business of the Tribunal amongst the Benches
thereof. 25
(5) On the application of any of the parties, the Presiding Officer may, after
notice to the parties concerned, and after hearing such of them as he may deem fit,
or on his own motion without such notice, transfer any case pending before one
Bench to any other Bench.
(6) If the Members of a Bench of the Tribunal differs in opinion on any point, 30
such point shall be decided according to the opinion of the majority, if there is a
majority, but if the Members are equally divided, they shall state the point or points
on which they differ and make a reference of such points to the Presiding Officer of
the Tribunal who shall either hear the same himself or refer the case for hearing on
such points by one or more of the other Members of the Tribunal and such point or
35
points shall be decided by the majority of the Members of the Tribunal who have
heard the case including those who first heard it.
Order 87. No order of the Central Government appointing any person as the
constituting Presiding Officer or a Member of the Tribunal shall be called in question in any
T
fi
r
n
i
a
b
l
u
a
n
n
a
d
l t
n
o
o
b
t
e
to manner, and no act or proceeding before the Tribunal shall be called in question in 40
invalidate its any manner on the ground merely of any vacancy or defect in the constitution of the
proceedings. Tribunal, as the case may be.
Right to legal 88. A party may either appear in person or authorise one or more chartered
representation. accountants or company secretaries or cost accountants or advocates or any of its
officers to present his case before the Tribunal. 45
Explanation.–– For the purposes of this section, the expressions—
(a) “advocate” shall have the same meaning as assigned to it in
clause (a) of sub-section (1) of section 2 of the Advocates Act, 1961; 25 of 1961.
43
(b) “chartered accountant” shall have the same meaning as assigned to it
in clause (b) of sub-section (1) of section 2 of the Chartered Accountants
38 of 1949. Act, 1949;
(c) “company secretary” shall have the same meaning as assigned to it
5 in clause (c) of sub-section (1) of section 2 of the Company Secretaries
56 of 1980. Act, 1980;
(d) “cost accountant” shall have the same meaning as assigned to it in
23 of 1959. clause (b) of sub-section (1) of section 2 of the Cost Accountants Act, 1959.
36 of 1963. 89. The provisions of the Limitation Act, 1963, shall, as far as may be, apply Limitation.
10 to an appeal made to the Tribunal.
90. The Presiding Officer, Members and other officers and employees of the
Presiding
Tribunal shall be deemed to be public servants within the meaning of clause (28) of Officer,
45 of 2023. section 2 of the Bharatiya Nyaya Sanhita, 2023. Members and
staff of Tribunal
to be public
servants.
91. Any person aggrieved by any decision or order of the Tribunal may file an Appeal to
15 appeal to the Supreme Court, within a period of sixty days from the date of Supreme Court.
communication of the decision or order of the Tribunal to him on any question of
law arising out of such order:
Provided that the Supreme Court may, if it is satisfied that the appellant was
prevented by sufficient cause from filing the appeal within the said period, allow it
20 to be filed within a further period not exceeding sixty days.
CHAPTER XII
PROHIBITION OF FRAUDULENT OR UNFAIR PRACTICES AND MARKET ABUSE
92. No person shall directly or indirectly commit any of the following Prohibition of
fraudulent or unfair practices,— fraudulent or
unfair practices.
25 (a) use or employ, in connection with the issue, purchase, sale of or any
dealings in securities listed or proposed to be listed on a stock exchange, any
manipulative or deceptive device or contrivance in contravention of the
provisions of this Code or the rules or regulations or bye-laws made thereunder;
(b) employ any device, scheme or artifice to defraud in connection with
30 the issue or dealing in securities which are listed or proposed to be listed on a
stock exchange;
(c) engage in any act, practice, course of business which operates or
would operate as fraud or deceit upon any person, in connection with the issue
or dealing in securities which are listed or proposed to be listed on a stock
35 exchange, in contravention of the provisions of this Code or the rules or
regulations or bye-laws made thereunder;
(d) acquire control of any company or securities more than the specified
percentage of equity share capital of a company whose securities are listed or
proposed to be listed on a stock exchange in contravention of the regulations
40 made under this Code;
(e) make any false or fraudulent entry in any record or any material and wilful
omission of any statement in the record, to be prepared or submitted under the
provisions of this Code or the rules or regulations or bye-laws made thereunder;
(f) engage in such other fraudulent or unfair practices in the securities
45 markets as may be specified by regulations.
44
Prohibition of 93. No person shall directly or indirectly commit any of the following acts of
market abuse.
market abuse, namely:––
(a) engage in insider trading;
(b) use or employ any device, scheme or artifice to defraud the investors
in the securities markets; 5
(c) deal in securities while in possession of material or non-public
information or communicating such material or non-public information to any
other person, in a manner which is in contravention of the provisions of this
Code or the rules or regulations or bye-laws made thereunder;
(d) publish or cause to publish or report or cause to report by a person 10
dealing in securities, any false or misleading information relating to securities
with the intent of artificially inflating, depressing, maintaining or causing
fluctuation in the price of, supply of or demand for such securities, or creating
a false or misleading impression as to the price of, supply of or demand for
such securities; 15
(e) use its position to inflate, depress, maintain or cause fluctuation in
the price of, supply of or demand for securities, or create a false or misleading
impression as to the price of, supply of or demand for securities;
(f) place any order in securities, while directly or indirectly in possession
of information which is not publicly available, regarding a substantial 20
impending transaction in securities, its underlying or its derivative; or
(g) engage in such other activities as may be specified by regulations
which adversely affects the integrity of the securities markets.
CHAPTER XIII
OFFENCES AND PENALTIES 25
Punishment for 94. Without prejudice to the imposition of any penalty under this Chapter,
failure to comply where any person—
orders.
(a) fails to comply with an interim order made under sub-section (2) of
section 27; or
(b) fails to comply with the final order made under section 20, 30
he shall be punishable with imprisonment for a term which shall not be less than
one month but may extend to ten years, or with fine which shall not be less than ten
lakh rupees, but may extend to twenty-five crore rupees, or with both.
Punishment for 95. Without prejudice to the imposition of any penalty under this Chapter, if
failure to comply any person fails without reasonable cause or refuses— 35
with directions
of Investigating (a) to preserve and produce any book of accounts, registers, records,
Officer.
information and other documents;
(b) to furnish such statement or undertaking or certificate;
(c) to provide reasonable assistance;
(d) to appear personally and take oath before the Investigating Officer 40
and answer any question put to him during such appearance;
(e) to sign the record of examination,
under sub-sections (1) and (2) of section 14, he shall be punishable with
imprisonment for a term which may extend to one year or with fine which shall not
be less than ten lakh rupees, but may extend to one crore rupees and also with a 45
further fine which may extend to five lakh rupees for each day after the first day
during which the failure or refusal continues, or with both.
45
96. Without prejudice to the imposition of any penalty under this Chapter, Punishment for
market abuse.
where any person commits or attempts to commit or abets the commission of market
abuse, he shall be punishable with imprisonment for a term which may extend to ten
years or with fine which shall not be less than ten lakh rupees, but may extend to
5 twenty-five crore rupees, or with both.
97. If any person–– Penalty for
failure to do
(a) fails to obtain certificate of registration and sponsors or carries on certain acts.
the activity in the securities markets without such certificate;
(b) fails to comply with the terms and conditions of certificate of
10 registration;
(c) furnishes any false statement for the purpose of opening or operation
of an account with a securities markets service provider;
(d) fails to make an application for listing of its schemes as specified in
the regulations;
15 (e) fails to refund the application money paid by investors within the
period specified in the regulations;
(f) fails to despatch, submit or credit any unit certificates or securities to
any investor as specified in the regulations;
(g) fails to furnish or file any information, document, books, returns or
20 report within the period specified therefor in the regulations, to the Board or
to a stock exchange, as the case may be;
(h) fails to furnish or files false, incorrect or incomplete information,
documents, books, return or any report;
(i) fails to maintain books of account or records;
25 (j) fails to enter into an agreement with its client;
(k) fails without reasonable cause or refuses to produce any record in its
custody or power;
(l) fails to comply with the regulations made by the Board or bye-laws
of a market infrastructure institution,
30 he shall be liable to a penalty specified as under,––
(i) if the default results in unlawful gain or causes loss to an investor or
other persons and such gain or loss is quantifiable, a penalty which shall not
be less than one lakh rupees but may extend to three times the amount of such
unlawful gain or loss, whichever is higher;
35 (ii) if the default does not result in unlawful gain or loss, or such unlawful
gain or loss is not quantifiable for reasons to be recorded in writing, a penalty
which shall not be less than one lakh rupees but may extend to one lakh rupees
for each day of such default, subject to a maximum of ten crore rupees.
98. If any securities markets service provider— Penalty for
default by
40 (a) fails to invest money collected by it in the manner or within the securities
period as specified by regulations; markets service
provider.
(b) fails to comply with any of the provisions of this Code, the rules or
the regulations made thereunder, or directions issued by the Board or the
bye-laws of a market infrastructure institution,
45 it shall be liable to a penalty specified as under,––
46
(i) if the default results in unlawful gain or causes loss to an investor or
other persons and such gain or loss is quantifiable, a penalty which shall not
be less than one lakh rupees but may extend to three times the amount of such
unlawful gain or loss, whichever is higher;
(ii) if the default does not result in unlawful gain or loss, or such unlawful 5
gain or loss is not quantifiable for reasons to be recorded in writing, a penalty
which shall not be less than one lakh rupees but may extend to one lakh rupees
for each day of such default, subject to a maximum of ten crore rupees.
Penalty for 99. If any stock broker––
default by stock
broker. (a) fails to issue contract notes in the form and manner specified by the 10
stock exchange of which such broker is a member;
(b) fails to deliver any security or fails to make payment of the amount
due to the investor in the manner and within the period as specified by
regulations;
(c) fails to segregate securities or money of the client or clients or uses 15
the securities or money of a client or clients for self or for any other client; or
(d) charges an amount of brokerage which is in excess of the brokerage
as specified by regulations,
he shall be liable to a penalty specified as under,––
(i) if the default results in unlawful gain or causes loss to an investor or 20
other persons and such gain or loss is quantifiable, a penalty which shall not
be less than one lakh rupees but may extend to three times the amount of such
unlawful gain or loss, whichever is higher;
(ii) if the default does not result in unlawful gain or loss, or such unlawful
gain or loss is not quantifiable for reasons to be recorded in writing, a penalty 25
which shall not be less than one lakh rupees but may extend to one lakh rupees
for each day of such default, subject to a maximum of ten crore rupees.
Penalty for 100. If any securities markets service provider or any issuer or its agent after
failure to redress being called upon by the Board in writing including by electronic means, to redress
grievances of
the grievances of investors, fails to redress such grievances within the period and 30
investors.
manner as specified by regulations, it shall be liable to a penalty specified as
under,––
(a) if the default results in unlawful gain or causes loss to an investor or
other persons and such gain or loss is quantifiable, a penalty which shall not
be less than one lakh rupees but may extend to three times the amount of such 35
unlawful gain or loss, whichever is higher;
(b) if the default does not result in unlawful gain or loss, or such unlawful
gain or loss is not quantifiable for reasons to be recorded in writing, a penalty
which shall not be less than one lakh rupees but may extend to one lakh rupees
for each day of such default, subject to a maximum of ten crore rupees. 40
101. If any issuer or its agent or any intermediary, fails to dematerialise the
Penalty for
failure to certificate of securities, within such time period as specified by regulations or
dematerialise bye-laws or delays the process of dematerialisation of securities, it shall be liable to
certificate of
a penalty specified as under,––
securities.
(a) if the default results in unlawful gain or causes loss to an investor or 45
other persons and such gain or loss is quantifiable, a penalty which shall not
be less than one lakh rupees but may extend to three times the amount of such
unlawful gain or loss, whichever is higher;
47
(b) if the default does not result in unlawful gain or loss, or such unlawful
gain or loss is not quantifiable for reasons to be recorded in writing, a penalty
which shall not be less than one lakh rupees but may extend to one lakh rupees
for each day of such default, subject to a maximum of ten crore rupees.
5 102. If any depository or intermediary or any depository participant or its Penalty for
failure to
agent or any issuer, fails to reconcile the records of dematerialised securities with
reconcile
all the securities issued by the issuer as specified by regulations, it shall be liable to
records.
a penalty specified as under,––
(a) if the default results in unlawful gain or causes loss to an investor or
10 other persons and such gain or loss is quantifiable, a penalty which shall not
be less than one lakh rupees but may extend to three times the amount of such
unlawful gain or loss, whichever is higher;
(b) if the default does not result in unlawful gain or loss, or such unlawful
gain or loss is not quantifiable for reasons to be recorded in writing, a penalty
15 which shall not be less than one lakh rupees but may extend to one lakh rupees
for each day of such default, subject to a maximum of ten crore rupees.
103. If any person,–– Penalty for other
non-compliance
of certain
(a) fails to––
provisions.
(i) disclose the aggregate of its shareholding in the body corporate
before it acquires any shares of that body corporate;
20
(ii) make a public announcement to acquire shares at a minimum
price;
(iii) make a public offer by sending letter of offer to the
shareholders of the concerned company;
(iv) make payment of consideration to the shareholders who sold
25
their shares pursuant to letter of offer;
(v) comply with the final order under section 20;
(vi) comply with an interim order under section 27;
(vii) comply with the provisions of section 52;
30 (viii) comply with the provisions of section 58; or
(ix) comply with the orders of the Tribunal under section 85;
(b) without possessing a certificate of registration, represents, behaves,
or otherwise holds itself out, in a manner which indicates that it possesses the
same;
35 (c) manages, controls, assists or permits a place other than that of a stock
exchange to be used for performance of contracts to be recorded or adjusted
or rights or liabilities arising out of such contracts in any manner whatsoever,
in contravention of the provisions of this Code;
(d) being a member of a stock exchange, settles any transaction of its
40 clients inter se with another member or members, without executing such
transactions through the stock exchange mechanism;
(e) not being a member of a stock exchange or its agent authorised as
such under the bye-laws of such stock exchange,––
48
(i) wilfully represents to or induces any person to believe that
contracts can be entered into or performed under this Code through him;
(ii) canvasses, advertises or touts in any manner either for himself or
on behalf of any other persons for any business connected with contracts;
(f) joins, gathers or assists in gathering any person or persons for making 5
bids or offers or for entering into or performing any contracts at any place
other than the place of business specified in the bye-laws of a stock exchange;
(g) enters into any contract in contravention of section 45;
(h) enters into any contract in contravention of section 46;
(i) deals with securities in contravention of section 64; 10
(j) deals with securities in contravention of section 66;
(k) knowingly alters, conceals, mutilates, destroys or makes a false entry
in any information, record (including electronic records), document or any
tangible object, so as to impede, obstruct, or influence the examination,
inquiry, investigation, audit, inspection, adjudication and a person shall be 15
deemed to have altered, concealed, mutilated, destroyed or falsified such
information, record or document if he fails to immediately report the matter to
the Board or fails to preserve the same till such information continues to be
relevant to any examination, inquiry, inspection, investigation, audit or
adjudication, which may be initiated by the Board; 20
(l) without being authorised to do so,––
(i) access or tries to access, or denies access or modifies access
parameters, to the regulatory data in the database;
(ii) downloads, extracts, copies, or reproduces in any form, the
regulatory data maintained in the system database;
25
(iii) knowingly introduces any computer virus or other computer
contaminant into the system database and brings out a trading halt;
(iv) disrupts the functioning of system database;
(v) knowingly damages, destroys, deletes, alters, diminishes in
value or utility, or affects by any means, the regulatory data in the system 30
database; or
(vi) knowingly provides any assistance to or causes any other
person to do any of the acts specified in sub-clauses (i) to (v).
Explanation.—For the purposes of clause (l), the expressions “computer
contaminant”, “computer virus” and “damage” shall have the same meanings 35
respectively assigned to them in section 43 of the Information Technology
Act, 2000; 21 of 2000.
(m) indulges in any fraudulent or unfair practices under section 92;
(n) commits market abuse under section 93;
(o) misuses or makes unauthorised usage of the accounts maintained 40
with the depository,
he shall be liable to a penalty specified as under,––
49
(i) if the default or contravention results in unlawful gain or causes loss
to an investor or other persons and such gain or loss is quantifiable, a penalty
which shall not be less than ten lakh rupees, but may extend to three times the
amount of such unlawful gain or loss made by such person as a result of the
5 default or contravention, whichever is higher:
Provided that where the higher limit of the penalty as quantified by the
adjudicating officer under this clause, is less than one hundred crore rupees,
he may, for reasons to be recorded in writing, impose a penalty which may
extend to one hundred crore rupees, if sufficient cause exists;
10 (ii) if the default or contravention does not result in unlawful gain or loss
to the person concerned, or such unlawful gain or loss is not quantifiable for
reasons to be recorded in writing, a penalty which shall not be less than ten
lakh rupees, but may extend to one hundred crore rupees.
104. If any market infrastructure institution fails to conduct its business with Penalty for
failure to
15 its members or any issuer or its agent or any person associated with the securities
conduct business
markets in accordance with the provisions of this Code or the rules or regulations in accordance
made thereunder, it shall be liable to a penalty specified as under,–– with provisions
of Code.
(a) if the default results in unlawful gain or causes loss to an investor or
other persons and such gain or loss is quantifiable, a penalty which shall not
20 be less than ten lakh rupees, but may extend to three times the amount of such
unlawful gain or loss made by such person as a result of the default, whichever
is higher:
Provided that where the higher limit of the penalty as quantified by the
adjudicating officer under this clause, is less than one hundred crore rupees,
25 he may, for reasons to be recorded in writing, impose a penalty which may
extend to one hundred crore rupees, if sufficient cause exists;
(b) if the default does not result in unlawful gain or loss to the person
concerned, or such unlawful gain or loss is not quantifiable for reasons to be
recorded in writing, a penalty which shall not be less than ten lakh rupees, but
30 may extend to one hundred crore rupees.
105. If any market infrastructure institution or any self-regulatory organisation Penalty for
fails or neglects to furnish periodical returns or furnishes false, incorrect or failure to furnish
periodical
incomplete periodical returns or fails or neglects to make or amend its bye-laws as
returns, etc.
directed by the Board or fails to comply with directions issued by the Board or the
35 adjudicating officer, it shall be liable to a penalty specified as under,––
(a) if the default results in unlawful gain or causes loss to an investor or
other persons and such gain or loss is quantifiable, a penalty which shall not
be less than ten lakh rupees, but may extend to three times the amount of such
unlawful gain or loss made by such person as a result of the default, whichever
40 is higher:
Provided that where the higher limit of the penalty as quantified by the
adjudicating officer under this clause, is less than one hundred crore rupees,
he may, for reasons to be recorded in writing, impose a penalty which may
extend to one hundred crore rupees, if sufficient cause exists;
45 (b) if the default does not result in unlawful gain or loss to the person
concerned, or such unlawful gain or loss is not quantifiable for reasons to be
recorded in writing, a penalty which shall not be less than ten lakh rupees, but
may extend to one hundred crore rupees.
50
Penalty for 106. If any securities markets service provider or any issuer or its agent fails
failure to comply to comply with the order made by the Ombudsperson under sub-section (1) of
with orders of
Ombudsperson. section 75, it shall be liable to a penalty specified as under,––
(a) if the default results in unlawful gain or causes loss to an investor or
other persons and such gain or loss is quantifiable, a penalty which shall not 5
be less than ten lakh rupees, but may extend to three times the amount of such
unlawful gain or loss made by such person as a result of the default, whichever
is higher:
Provided that where the higher limit of the penalty as quantified by the
adjudicating officer under this clause, is less than one hundred crore rupees, 10
he may, for reasons to be recorded in writing, impose a penalty which may
extend to one hundred crore rupees, if sufficient cause exists;
(b) if the default does not result in unlawful gain or loss to the person
concerned, or such unlawful gain or loss is not quantifiable for reasons to be
recorded in writing, a penalty which shall not be less than ten lakh rupees, but 15
may extend to one hundred crore rupees.
Penalty for 107. If a person managing a pooled investment vehicle––
default by
person managing (a) fails to comply with the conditions specified in the listing agreement,
pooled listing or delisting conditions or commits a breach thereof;
investment
vehicle. (b) manipulates the books or financial statements or siphons of public 20
issue proceeds of such entity,
he shall be liable to a penalty specified as under––
(i) if the default results in unlawful gain or causes loss to an investor or
other persons and such gain or loss is quantifiable, a penalty which shall not
be less than ten lakh rupees, but may extend to three times the amount of such 25
unlawful gain or loss made by such person as a result of the default, whichever
is higher:
Provided that where the higher limit of the penalty as quantified by the
adjudicating officer under this clause, is less than one hundred crore rupees,
he may, for reasons to be recorded in writing, impose a penalty which may 30
extend to one hundred crore rupees, if sufficient cause exists;
(ii) if the default does not result in unlawful gain or loss to the person
concerned, or such unlawful gain or loss is not quantifiable for reasons to be
recorded in writing, a penalty which shall not be less than ten lakh rupees, but
may extend to one hundred crore rupees. 35
108. An issuer who dematerialises securities more than the issued securities
Penalty for
excess of a company or delivers in the stock exchange the securities which are not listed on
dematerialisation the stock exchange or delivers securities where no trading permission has been given
or delivery of
by the stock exchange, it shall be liable to a penalty specified as under,––
unlisted
securities.
(a) if the default results in unlawful gain or causes loss to an investor or 40
other persons and such gain or loss is quantifiable, a penalty which shall not
be less than ten lakh rupees, but may extend to three times the amount of such
unlawful gain or loss made by such person as a result of the default, whichever
is higher:
Provided that where the higher limit of the penalty as quantified by the 45
adjudicating officer under this clause, is less than one hundred crore rupees,
he may, for reasons to be recorded in writing, impose a penalty which may
extend to one hundred crore rupees, if sufficient cause exists;
51
(b) if the default does not result in unlawful gain or loss to the person
concerned, or such unlawful gain or loss is not quantifiable for reasons to be
recorded in writing, a penalty which shall not be less than ten lakh rupees, but
may extend to one hundred crore rupees.
5 109. If any person contravenes any of the provisions of this Code or the rules Penalty where
no specific
or regulations made thereunder for which no penalty or punishment is provided in
provision for
this Code, such person shall be liable to a penalty specified as under,–– penalty is
provided.
(a) if the default results in unlawful gain or causes loss to an investor or
other persons and such gain or loss is quantifiable, a penalty which shall not
10 be less than one lakh rupees but may extend to three times the amount of such
unlawful gain or loss, whichever is higher;
(b) if the default does not result in unlawful gain or loss, or such unlawful
gain or loss is not quantifiable for reasons to be recorded in writing, a penalty
which shall not be less than one lakh rupees but may extend to one lakh rupees
15 for each day of such default, subject to a maximum of ten crore rupees.
110. (1) Where a company contravenes the provisions of this Code or the rules Contravention
or regulations or orders made thereunder, every officer who, at the time when the by companies.
contravention was committed, was in-charge of, and was responsible to the
company for the conduct of the business of the company, as well as the company,
20 shall be deemed to be guilty of the contravention and shall be liable to be proceeded
against accordingly:
Provided that nothing contained in this section shall render any such person
liable for the contravention, if he proves that the contravention was committed
without his knowledge or that he had exercised all due diligence to prevent the
25 commission of such contravention.
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in this section—
(a) an independent director;
(b) a non-executive director not being a promoter or a key managerial
personnel,
30 shall be held liable in respect of such acts of omission or commission by a company
which had occurred with his knowledge, attributable through the process of the
Board of Directors, and with his consent or connivance or where he had not acted
diligently.
(3) Where a contravention has been committed by a company and it is proved
35 that the contravention has been committed with the consent or connivance of, or is
attributable to any neglect on the part of, any officer of the company, by whatever
name called, such officer shall also be deemed to be guilty of the contravention and
shall be liable to be proceeded against accordingly.
Explanation.––For the purposes of this section, the expressions—
40 (a) “company” means any body corporate and includes a firm or other
association of individuals;
(b) “officer”, in relation to a—
(i) company, means an officer as defined in clause (59) of
18 of 2013. section 2 of the Companies Act, 2013;
(ii) limited liability partnership or that of any other firm, shall
45
mean a partner and employee of that firm;
52
(iii) any other body corporate or association of individuals shall
mean any manager, secretary or any other employee by whatever name
called.
Factors to be 111. In addition to the factors specified under section 19, the adjudicating
considered by officer may also consider the following factors while imposing the penalty under 5
adjudicating
sections 97 to 109,—
officer for
imposition of
(a) the amount required to be disgorged under section 25; and
penalty.
(b) any aggravating and mitigating circumstances.
Penalty to be 112. All sums realised by way of penalty by the Board under this Code shall
credited to be credited to the Consolidated Fund of India in such manner as may be prescribed. 10
Consolidated
Fund of India. CHAPTER XIV
SPECIAL COURTS
Establishment of 113. (1) For the purposes of providing speedy trial of offences under
Special Courts. this Code, the Central Government may by notification, with the concurrence
of the Chief Justice of the High Court concerned, for such area or areas as may be 15
specified therein, establish or designate as many Special Courts as may be
necessary:
Provided that any notification issued under section 26A of the Securities
Contracts (Regulation) Act, 1956, section 26A of the Securities and Exchange 42 of 1956.
Board of India Act, 1992, and section 22C of the Depositories Act, 1996, 20 15 of 1992.
establishing or designating Special Courts and in force immediately before the date 22 of 1996.
of commencement of this Code shall, on such commencement, be deemed to have
been issued under this section and shall continue to have the same force and effect
after such commencement until it is amended, rescinded or superseded under the
provisions of this section. 25
(2) A Special Court shall consist of a single judge and he shall not be
qualified for appointment as such, unless he immediately before such appointment,
holds the office of a Sessions Judge or an Additional Sessions Judge, as the case
may be.
(3) When trying an offence under this Code, a Special Court may also try an 30
offence other than an offence under this Code with which the accused may, under
the Bharatiya Nagarik Suraksha Sanhita, 2023, be charged at the same trial. 46 of 2023.
(4) Notwithstanding anything contained in the Bharatiya Nagarik Suraksha
Sanhita, 2023, any offence committed under this Code and triable by a Special Court 46 of 2023.
shall, until a Special Court is established or designated, be tried by a Court of 35
Session exercising jurisdiction over the area:
Provided that nothing contained in this sub-section shall affect the powers of
the High Court under section 447 of the Bharatiya Nagarik Suraksha Sanhita, 2023 46 of 2023.
to transfer any case or class of cases of which cognizance has been taken by a Court
of Session under this section. 40
(5) Where any proceedings under sub-section (4) is pending before a Court of
Session, such proceedings shall be transferred, heard and disposed of by a Special
Court on being established or designated under this Code.
Appeal and 114. The High Court may exercise, so far as may be applicable, all the powers
revision. conferred by Chapters XXXI and XXXII of the Bharatiya Nagarik Suraksha 45
Sanhita, 2023 on a High Court, as if a Special Court within the local limits of the 46 of 2023.
jurisdiction of the High Court were a Court of Session trying cases within the local
limits of the jurisdiction of the High Court.
53
115. (1) Save as otherwise provided in this Code, the provisions A p p l ic a t io n o f
Bharatiya
46 of 2023. of the Bharatiya Nagarik Suraksha Sanhita, 2023 shall apply to the
Nagarik
proceedings before a Special Court and for the purposes of the said provisions, S u r a k s h a
the Special Court shall be deemed to be a Court of Session and the person Sanhita to
5 conducting prosecution before a Special Court shall be deemed to be a Public proceedings
before Special
Prosecutor within the meaning of clause (v) of section 2 of the Bharatiya Nagarik
Court.
Suraksha Sanhita, 2023.
(2) The person conducting prosecution referred to in sub-section (1)
should have been in practice as an advocate for not less than seven years or
10 should have held a post, for a period of not less than seven years, under
the Central Government or a State Government, requiring special
knowledge of law.
(3) Notwithstanding anything contained in the Bharatiya Nagarik Suraksha
46 of 2023. Sanhita, 2023, the Special Court shall take cognizance of an offence without the
15 accused being committed to it for trial and in trying the offence, the Special
Court shall hold trial in accordance with the provisions of the Bharatiya Nagarik
Suraksha Sanhita, 2023 as it applies to a trial before a Court of Session.
116. No court shall take cognizance of any offence punishable under this Cognizance of
Code, except on a complaint made in writing by the Board, or an officer or a offences by
court.
20 person authorised by it in this behalf.
117. (1) Notwithstanding anything contained in the Bharatiya Nagarik Compounding of
certain offences.
46 of 2023. Suraksha Sanhita, 2023, any offence punishable under this Code, not being an
offence punishable with imprisonment only, or with imprisonment and with fine,
may either before or after the institution of any proceeding, be compounded by,
25 the Tribunal on such terms and conditions and on payment of such sum as may
be prescribed, or a court before which such proceedings are pending:
Provided that any offence punishable under this Code shall not
be compounded, if the investigation against such person is pending under
this Code.
30 (2) Nothing in sub-section (1) shall apply to an offence committed by a
person within a period of three years from the date on which a similar offence
committed by it was compounded under this section.
Explanation.––For the purposes of this sub-section, any subsequent
offence committed after the expiry of a period of three years from the date on
35 which the offence was previously compounded, shall be deemed to be a first
offence.
(3) The Tribunal or the court, as the case may be, shall not decide an
application under sub-section (1), unless the Board has been given an
opportunity of being heard in the matter.
40 (4) If any person fails to comply with the decision of the Tribunal or the
court, as the case may be, the maximum amount of fine for the offence proposed
to be compounded shall be twice the amount provided in the corresponding
provisions in which punishment for such offence is provided.
(5) Where the compounding of any offence is made by the Tribunal after
45 the institution of any proceedings before the court, such compounding shall be
brought to the notice of such court in which the proceeding is pending and on
such notice of the compounding of the offence being given, the person in relation
to whom the offence is so compounded shall be discharged.
54
CHAPTER XV
INTER-REGULATORY COORDINATION
Issuance or 118. (1) The other regulated instrument may be issued through or be held in a
holding of other depository, under the provisions of any other law for the time being in force or any
regulated
instrument. order or direction issued by other regulatory authority. 5
(2) The Board may, in consultation with the other regulatory authority provide
the conditions and procedures relating to the issuance and holding of other regulated
instrument through depositories as may be specified by regulations.
Listing and 119. (1) The Board may permit any other regulated instrument to be listed on
trading of other a stock exchange, if the listing of such other regulated instrument is permitted by 10
regulated
other regulatory authority.
instrument.
(2) The other regulated instrument which is listed on a stock exchange shall
be listed, traded, cleared and settled in accordance with the provisions of this Code
and shall be subject to such other conditions as may be specified by regulations in
consultation with the other regulatory authority. 15
(3) Where the other regulated instrument has been permitted to be listed on a
stock exchange, the Board and the other regulatory authority may implement such
other measures as may be necessary or expedient to facilitate—
(a) interoperability of any platform for the holding or transfer of such
other regulated instrument under its jurisdiction with any market infrastructure 20
institution;
(b) its transfer from other platform under the jurisdiction of other
regulatory authority to any market infrastructure institution, or vice-versa; and
(c) such other measures as may be deemed necessary.
Cooperation 120. The Board may enter into a memorandum of understanding with any 25
between Board other regulatory authority for the purpose of any matter, including the issuance,
and other
holding, listing or trading of any other regulated instrument through any market
regulatory
authority. infrastructure institution and sharing of information thereto and on the inter se
responsibilities between the Board and other regulatory authority.
General 121. The Board and the other regulatory authority while exercising their 30
conditions for powers and performing their duties under this Chapter shall—
Board and other
regulatory (a) facilitate investor participation in other regulated instrument, ensure
authority.
investor protection and promote the orderly development of securities
markets;
(b) consult and coordinate to ensure and achieve harmonisation of 35
regulatory action in respect of any other regulated instrument; and
(c) make information available to each other such as issuing, holding,
listing, trading and settlement of other regulated instrument in a timely
manner.
Board to take 122. (1) Where a person registered with the other regulatory authority 40
action against contravenes any provisions of this Code or the rules or regulations or bye-laws made
entity registered
thereunder, the Board may either on its own motion or upon a reference being made
with other
regulatory by such other regulatory authority, initiate appropriate proceedings against such
authority. person and shall inform such other regulatory authority.
(2) Where the Board is of the opinion that the person referred to in 4 5
sub-section (1) has contravened the provisions of the law under which it is
registered, including any rules or regulations or bye-laws made thereunder, it shall
inform the other regulatory authority concerned about such contravention for
necessary action in accordance with such law.
55
CHAPTER XVI
FINANCE, ACCOUNTS AND AUDIT
123. The Central Government may, after due appropriation made by the Grants by
Parliament by law in this behalf, make grants to the Board of such sums of money Central
Government.
5 as the Central Government may think appropriate for the purposes of this Code.
124. (1) The Securities and Exchange Board of India General Fund established Fund.
under section 14 of the Securities and Exchange Board of India Act, 1992, shall be
15 of 1992.
deemed to be the Fund for the purposes of this Code and there shall be credited
thereto,—
10
(a) all grants, fees and charges received by the Board under this Code;
(b) all sums received by the Board as costs pursuant to an order of a court
or Tribunal, as the case may be; and
(c) all sums received by the Board from such other sources as may be
decided upon by the Central Government.
15 (2) The Fund shall be applied to meet—
(a) the salaries, allowances and other remuneration of the Members,
officers and other employees of the Board;
(b) the expenses of the Board in the discharge of its functions under
section 11;
(c) the expenses for the purposes of this Code; and
20
(d) the capital expenditure, in accordance with the annual capital
expenditure plan approved by the Board.
(3) The Board shall constitute a reserve fund and twenty-five per cent. of the
annual surplus of the General Fund in any financial year shall be credited to such
25 reserve fund which shall not exceed the total of annual expenditure of the preceding
two financial years.
Explanation.––For the purposes of this sub-section, annual surplus means the
sum credited to the General Fund in a financial year under sub-section (1) in excess
of the sum applied in that financial year for the purposes specified in
30 sub-section (2).
(4) The sum credited to the reserve fund shall be utilised for the purposes of
meeting the expenses of the Board in the discharge of its functions, as may be
decided by the Board.
(5) After crediting the portion of the annual surplus under sub-section (3), the
35 remaining annual surplus of the General Fund for that financial year shall be
credited to the Consolidated Fund of India.
125. (1) The Investor Protection and Education Fund established under the Investor
Securities and Exchange Board of India (Investor Protection and Education Fund) Protection and
Education Fund.
Regulations, 2009 shall be deemed to be the Investor Protection and Education Fund
40 for the purposes of this Code and there shall be credited thereto,––
(a) contribution as may be made by the Board to the Investor Protection
and Education Fund;
(b) grants and donations to the Investor Protection and Education Fund
by the Central Government, State Governments, or such other persons as may
45 be specified by regulations;
(c) amounts disgorged under section 25;
56
(d) interest or other income received out of any investments made from
the Investor Protection and Education Fund; and
(e) such other funds as may be decided by the Board.
(2) The Investor Protection and Education Fund shall be administered and
utilised by the Board in such manner as may be specified by regulations for the 5
promotion of education, awareness and protection of investors:
Provided that the disgorged amounts credited under clause (c) of
sub-section (1) and any interest accrued thereto as credited to the Investor Protection
and Education Fund, shall be first utilised by the Board for the purpose of making
restitution under sub-section (2) of section 25, and thereafter, any remaining amount 10
shall be utilised in accordance with this sub-section.
Accounts and 126. (1) The Board shall maintain proper accounts and other relevant records,
audit.
and prepare an annual statement of accounts along with the accounts of the Investor
Protection and Education Fund, in such form as may be prescribed in consultation
with the Comptroller and Auditor-General of India.
15
(2) The accounts referred to in sub-section (1) shall be audited by the
Comptroller and Auditor-General of India at such intervals as may be specified by
him and any expenditure incurred in connection with such audit shall be payable by
the Board to the Comptroller and Auditor-General of India.
(3) The Comptroller and Auditor-General of India and any other person 20
appointed by him in connection with the audit of the accounts of the Board shall
have the same rights, privileges and authority in connection with such audit as the
Comptroller and Auditor-General of India generally has in connection with the audit
of the Government accounts and, in particular, shall have the right to demand the
production of books, accounts, connected vouchers and other documents and papers 25
and to inspect any of the offices of the Board.
(4) The accounts referred to in sub-section (1) as certified by the Comptroller
and Auditor-General of India or any other person appointed by him in this behalf,
together with the audit report thereon, shall be forwarded annually to the Central
Government, who shall cause the same to be laid before each House of Parliament. 30
Returns and 127. (1) The Board shall furnish to the Central Government, at such time and
reports. in such form and manner, as may be prescribed, or as the Central Government may
direct, such returns and statements and such particulars in regard to any proposed or
existing programme for the promotion and development of the securities markets,
as the Central Government may require, from time to time. 35
(2) Without prejudice to the provisions of sub-section (1), the Board shall,
after the end of each financial year within a period of ninety days, submit to the
Central Government a report in such form, as may be prescribed, giving a true and
full account of its activities, policies and programmes during the previous financial
year. 40
(3) A copy of the report received under sub-section (2) shall be laid, as soon
as may be after it is received, before each House of Parliament.
CHAPTER XVII
MISCELLANEOUS
Regulatory 128. (1) The Board may establish a regulatory sandbox for the development 45
sandbox. of a new product, contract or service in the securities markets along with any
exemptions or modifications, on its own motion or on an application made by any
person, in such manner as may be specified by regulations.
57
(2) If a product, contract or service referred to in sub-section (1) falls within
the jurisdiction of one or more other regulatory authority, any exemption given or
modification made, shall be in consultation with such regulatory authority.
(3) The Board shall, while establishing a regulatory sandbox,––
5 (a) consider the impact of the proposed product, contract or service on
the systemic stability of the securities markets, amongst other factors;
(b) ensure that there are adequate safeguards to protect the interests of
the investors and recipients of the services; and
(c) specify by regulations the conditions and procedure for making an
10 application for participation in the regulatory sandbox.
129. (1) The National Institute of Securities Markets, a public trust established National
Institute of
by the Board shall be deemed to have been established under this Code.
Securities
(2) The Board shall regulate the National Institute of Securities Markets for Markets.
capacity building of intermediaries.
15 130. All Members, officers and other employees of the Board shall be deemed, Members,
when acting or purporting to act in pursuance of any of the provisions of this Code,
officers and
employees of
to be public servants within the meaning of clause (28) of section 2 of the Bharatiya Board to be
45 of 2023. Nyaya Sanhita, 2023. public servants.
131. (1) Without prejudice to the foregoing provisions of this Code, the Board Power of Central
20 shall, in exercise of its powers or the performance of its duties under this Code, be Government to
issue directions.
bound by such directions on questions of policy as the Central Government may
give in writing to it, from time to time:
Provided that the Board shall, as far as practicable, be given an opportunity to
express its views before any direction is given under this sub-section.
(2) The decision of the Central Government whether a question is one of
25
policy or not shall be final.
132. The Board may, by general or special order in writing, delegate to any Power of Board
Member, officer of the Board or any other person subject to such conditions, if any, as to delegate.
may be specified in the order, such of its powers and functions under this Code, except
30
the powers exercisable under sections 128, 146 and 149, as it may deem necessary.
133. (1) If at any time the Central Government is of the opinion that— Power of Central
Government to
(a) on account of grave emergency, the Board is unable to discharge the
supersede Board.
functions and duties imposed on it, by or under this Code; or
(b) the Board has persistently made default in complying with any
35 directions issued by the Central Government under this Code or in the
discharge of the functions and duties imposed on it under this Code and as a
result of such default the financial position of the Board or the administration
of the Board has deteriorated; or
(c) circumstances exist which render it necessary in the public interest
40 so to do,
it may, by notification, supersede the Board for such period, not exceeding six
months, as may be specified therein.
(2) Upon the publication of a notification under sub-section (1) superseding
the Board,—
45 (a) all the Members of the Board shall, as from the date of supersession,
vacate their offices as such;
(b) all the powers, functions and duties which may, by or under the
provisions of this Code, be exercised or discharged by or on behalf of the
Board, shall until the Board is reconstituted under sub-section (3), be exercised
50 and discharged by such person or persons as the Central Government may
direct; and
58
(c) all the property owned and controlled by the Board shall, until the
Board is reconstituted under sub-section (3), vest in the Central Government.
(3) On the expiration of the period of supersession specified in the notification
issued under sub-section (1), the Central Government may re-constitute the Board
by a fresh appointment and in such case any person or persons who vacated their 5
offices under clause (a) of sub-section (2), shall not be deemed disqualified for
appointment:
Provided that the Central Government may, at any time before the expiry of
the period of supersession take action under this sub-section.
(4) The Central Government shall cause a notification issued under 1 0
sub-section (1) and a full report of any action taken under this section and the
circumstances leading to such action to be laid before each House of Parliament at
the earliest.
Confidentiality 134. The Board and its Members including its officers and employees, a market
to be maintained infrastructure institution and a self-regulatory organisation including their officers and 15
by Board and its
employees and the members of their governing board, shall maintain confidentiality
Members.
of any regulatory data and other commercially sensitive information that is obtained
or produced in the discharge of their functions under this Code, unless—
(a) any provision of this Code or of any other law for the time being in
force permits or requires its publication or disclosure; 20
(b) the person from whom it was obtained or the person to whom it
relates, consents to its disclosure;
(c) such data or information is already available to the public from other
sources;
(d) the disclosure enables or assists the Board or the market 25
infrastructure institution concerned or self-regulatory organisation to
discharge its functions under this Code; or
(e) the disclosure is directed by a judicial or a quasi-judicial authority
having jurisdiction, for the purpose of any proceedings.
Power of Central 135. (1) If the Central Government, on the recommendation of the Board, is 30
Government to satisfied, that any person, who is alleged to have contravened the provisions of this
grant immunity. Code or the rules or regulations or bye-laws made thereunder, has made a full and
true disclosure in respect of the alleged contravention, it may grant to such person,
subject to such conditions as it may think fit, immunity from prosecution for any
offence or from the imposition of any penalty under this Code with respect to the 35
alleged contravention:
Provided that no immunity shall be granted in such cases where the
proceedings have been instituted before the receipt of application for grant of such
immunity:
Provided further that the recommendation of the Board shall not be binding 40
upon the Central Government.
(2) Any immunity granted to a person under sub-section (1) may, at any time,
be withdrawn by the Central Government, if it is satisfied that such person had, in
course of the proceedings, not complied with the condition on which the immunity
was granted or had given false evidence, and thereupon such person may be tried 45
for the offence with respect to which the immunity was granted or for any other
offence of which it appears to have been guilty in connection with the contravention
and shall also be liable to penalty to which such person would have been liable, had
such immunity not been granted.
59
136. (1) If any person fails to–– Recovery of
amounts.
(a) pay the penalty imposed;
(b) comply with any order of the adjudicating officer for refund of
money;
(c) pay disgorgement amount;
5
(d) pay any fees due to the Board;
(e) pay the amount due pursuant to an order passed by an Ombudsperson
under this Code,
the Recovery Officer may draw up under his signature a statement in the specified
10 form, referred to as the certificate of recovery, specifying the amount due from the
person and shall proceed to recover from such person the amount specified in such
certificate by one or more of the following modes, namely:—
(i) attachment and sale of the person’s movable property;
(ii) attachment of the person’s bank accounts;
15 (iii) attachment and sale of the person’s immovable property;
(iv) arrest of the person and his detention in prison;
(v) appointing a receiver for the management of the person’s movable
and immovable properties,
and for this purpose, the provisions of sections 411 to 419 and 421 of the
30 of 2025. 20 Income-tax Act, 2025 and any rules made under these provisions, in so far as
may be, apply with necessary modifications, as if the said provisions and the rules
were made under the provisions of this Code and such amount shall be deemed
to be the amount due under this Code instead of income-tax under the Income-tax
Act, 2025.
25 Explanation.––For the removal of doubts, it is hereby clarified that,––
(a) the person’s movable or immovable property or money held in bank
account shall include any property or money held in bank account which has
been transferred without adequate consideration, directly or indirectly, on or
after the date when the amount specified in the certificate had become due, by
such person to any other person; and so far as the movable or immovable
30
property or money held in bank account are transferred to a minor child, such
property shall, even after the date of attainment of majority by such minor
child, continue to be included in the person’s movable or immovable property
or money held in bank account for recovering any amount due from the person
35 under this Code;
(b) any reference to appeal in Chapter XIX-D of the Income-tax
30 of 2025. Act, 2025, shall be construed as a reference to appeal before the Tribunal
under section 85;
(c) the interest referred to in section 411 of the Income-tax Act, 2025
40 shall be calculated from the date the amount becomes payable by the person;
30 of 2025. (d) till the provisions of the Income-tax Act, 2025 come into force, the
43 of 1961. corresponding provisions of the Income-tax Act, 1961 shall apply.
(2) The Recovery Officer may seek the assistance of the local district
administration including local police while exercising the powers under
45 sub-section (1).
(3) The recovery under sub-section (1), shall have precedence over any other
claim against such person except the claims of secured creditors as defined in the
Securitisation and Reconstruction of Financial Assets and Enforcement of Security
54 of 2002. Interest Act, 2002.
60
(4) The Recovery Officer may, on his own motion or on a request made by
any party, rectify any error apparent on the face of the record in a certificate drawn
or an order issued by him, within a period of thirty days from the date of issuance
of such certificate or order.
(5) The Recovery Officer while rectifying any error under sub-section (4), 5
shall not modify the substantive part of such certificate or order.
Continuance of 137. (1) On the death of a person, his legal representative shall be liable to pay
proceedings. any sum which the deceased would have been liable to pay, had he not died, in the
like manner and to the same extent as the deceased:
Provided that the legal representative shall be liable to pay any penalty only 10
in case the penalty has been imposed before the death of the deceased person.
(2) For the purposes of sub-section (1), any proceeding for disgorgement,
refund or an action for recovery before the Recovery Officer, except a proceeding
for levy of penalty,—
(a) initiated against the deceased before his death, shall be deemed to 15
have been initiated against the legal representative and may be continued
against such legal representative from the stage at which it stood on the date
of the death of the deceased; and
(b) which would have been initiated against the deceased, if he had
survived and may be initiated against the legal representative, 20
and all the provisions of this Code shall apply accordingly.
(3) Every legal representative shall be personally liable for any sum payable
by him in his capacity as legal representative if, while his liability for such sum
remains undischarged, he creates a charge on or disposes of or parts with any assets
of the estate of the deceased, which are in, or may come into his possession, but 25
such liability shall be limited to the value of the asset so charged, disposed of or
parted with.
(4) The liability of a legal representative shall be limited to the extent to which
the estate of the deceased is capable of meeting such liability.
Explanation.––For the purposes of this section, the expression “legal 30
representative” means a person who in law represents the estate of a deceased
person, and includes any person who intermeddles with the estate of the deceased
and where a party sues or is sued in a representative character, the person on whom
the estate devolves on the death of the party so suing or sued.
Bar of 138. (1) No civil court shall have jurisdiction to entertain any suit or 35
jurisdiction of proceeding in respect of any matter which the Board, the adjudicating officer, the
civil court. market infrastructure institution and the Tribunal are empowered by, or under, this
Code to determine, and no injunction shall be granted by any court or other authority
in respect of any action taken or to be taken in pursuance of any powers conferred
by or under this Code. 40
(2) No order passed by the Board, the adjudicating officer, the Ombudsperson
or the market infrastructure institution shall be appealable, except as provided in
section 85.
Protection of 139. No suit, prosecution or other legal proceedings shall lie against the
action taken in Central Government or the Board or any officer of the Central Government or any 45
good faith.
Member referred to in sub-section (1) of section 4, officer or other employee of the
Board for anything which is done or intended to be done in good faith under this
Code or the rules or regulations or bye-laws made thereunder.
61
30 of 2025. 140. Notwithstanding anything contained in the Income-tax Act, 2025 or any Exemption from
other law for the time being in force relating to tax on income, profit, gains, the
tax on income.
Board shall not be liable to pay income-tax, or any other tax in respect of its income,
profits or gains derived.
5 Explanation.—For the removal of doubts, it is hereby clarified that till the
30 of 2025. provisions of the Income-tax Act, 2025 come into force, the corresponding
43 of 1961. provisions of the Income-tax Act, 1961 shall apply.
141. Notwithstanding anything contained in any other law for the time being Power of Board
in force, the powers exercisable by the Board under this Code,— not to apply to
International
10 (a) shall not extend to an International Financial Services Centre set up Financial
28 of 2005. under sub-section (1) of section 18 of the Special Economic Zones Act, 2005; Services Centre.
(b) shall be exercisable by the International Financial Services Centres
Authority established under sub-section (1) of section 4 of the International
50 of 2019. Financial Services Centres Authority Act, 2019,
15 in so far as regulation of financial products, financial services and financial
institutions that are permitted in the International Financial Services Centres are
concerned.
142. The provisions of this Code shall be in addition to, and not in derogation Application of
of the provisions of any other law for the time being in force. other laws not
barred.
20 143. (1) The provisions of this Code shall not apply to the Central Code not to
Government, the Reserve Bank, any local authority or any corporation set up by a apply in certain
cases.
special law or any person who has effected any transaction with or through the
agency of any such authority referred to in this sub-section:
Provided that the provisions of this Code shall apply to such transactions or
25 securities that are listed or proposed to be listed and to the issuer of such securities.
(2) Without prejudice to the provisions contained in sub-section (1), if the
Central Government is of the opinion that in the interest of trade and commerce or
the economic development of the country, it is necessary or expedient so to do, it
may notify any class of contracts to which the provisions of this Code shall not
30 apply, subject to such conditions, limitations or restrictions, if any.
144. The Central Government may, by order published in the Official Gazette, Power of Central
direct that the powers except the powers under sections 131, 135 and 145 exercisable Government to
delegate.
by it under this Code shall, in relation to such matters and subject to such conditions,
if any, as may be specified in the order, be exercisable also by the Board or the
35 Reserve Bank.
145. (1) The Central Government may, by notification and subject to the Power to make
condition of previous publication, make rules not inconsistent with the provisions rules.
of this Code for carrying out the purposes of this Code:
Provided that where the Central Government is of the opinion that the rules
40 are required to be made urgently in public interest, it may, for reasons to be recorded
in writing, dispense with the condition of previous publication.
(2) In particular and without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing
power, such rules may provide for all or any of the following matters, namely:––
(a) the manner of appointment of Chairperson and Members under
45 sub-section (3) of section 4;
(b) the other terms and conditions under sub-section (3) of section 5;
(c) the other functions of the Board under clause (z) of sub-section (2)
of section 11;
(d) the manner of crediting settlement amount to the Consolidated Fund
50 of India under sub-section (8) of section 26;
62
(e) the salaries, allowances and conditions of service of the officers and
employees of the Tribunal under sub-section (3) of section 84;
(f) the form, manner and fee for filing an appeal under sub-section (3) of
section 85;
(g) the other matters under clause (h) of sub-section (2) of section 86; 5
(h) the manner of crediting all sums realised by way of penalty into
Consolidated Fund of India under section 112;
(i) the terms and conditions and the sums payable under sub-section (1)
of section 117;
(j) the form for maintaining proper accounts, other relevant records and 10
the preparation of annual statement of account alongwith the accounts of the
Investor Protection and Education Fund under sub-section (1) of section 126;
(k) the time, form and manner of furnishing returns, statements and
particulars in regard to any proposed or existing programme for the promotion
and development of securities markets under sub-section (1) of section 127; 15
(l) the form for submitting report, giving a true and full account of
activities, policies and programmes during the previous financial year under
sub-section (2) of section 127;
(m) any matter which is to be or may be prescribed or in respect of which
provisions is to be made by rules. 20
Power to make 146. (1) The Board may, by notification make regulations not inconsistent
regulations. with the provisions of this Code for carrying out the purposes of this Code.
(2) In particular and without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing
power, such regulations may provide for all or any of the following matters,
namely:— 25
(a) the other services for the purposes of the definition of depository
services under sub-clause (iv) of clause (l) of section 2;
(b) the form of records under clause (ze) of section 2;
(c) the time and place, the rules of procedure of transaction of business
at the meetings of the Board, including quorum and the manner of maintaining 30
arrangements for recording, safe-keeping and for taking decisions and
publication thereof under sub-section (1) of section 8;
(d) the direct or indirect interest, including the interest of any family
member, under sub-section (4) of section 8;
(e) the qualifications, method of recruitment and the terms and 35
conditions of service of officers and employees of the Board under
sub-section (2) of section 9;
(f) the manner for undertaking inspection of a securities markets service
provider, a market participant or any other person associated with the
securities markets under section 12; 40
(g) the manner of seeking assistance by the Board of a securities markets
service provider or an expert to assist the Investigating Officer under
sub-section (1), the form of the order directing investigation under
sub-section (2), the criteria and manner of quantification of unlawful gains or
losses under sub-section (3) and the procedure of conducting investigation 45
under sub-section (5), of section 13;
63
(h) the form and manner of serving notice by the Investigating Officer
under sub-section (6) of section 14;
(i) the rank of officer to be designated as an adjudicating officer under
sub-section (1) of section 17;
5 (j) the manner for conducting adjudication proceedings under
sub-section (4) of section 17;
(k) the relevant document and particulars to be enclosed with a show
cause notice under sub-section (1) of section 18;
(l) the procedure, the criteria for distribution of disgorged amount, the
10 order of priority and the other conditions to provide restitution from the
disgorged amount under sub-section (2) of section 25;
(m) the conditions, the fee, the time and manner of filing an application
for settlement of proceedings initiated or to be initiated under sub-section (1),
the members, the terms and conditions for constitution of committee for
15 advising the Board under sub-section (2), the other factors for settlement
proceedings under sub-section (3) and the manner for conducting settlement
proceedings under sub-section (6), of section 26;
(n) the form and manner, the eligibility criteria and fee payable and the
period for rectification of the defects in the application for registration under
20 sub-section (2) and the form and manner, the terms and conditions and the
time period for issuing a certificate of registration and any additional
conditions under sub-section (3), of section 28;
(o) the form and manner and the conditions for surrendering the
certificate of registration under sub-section (1), and the period of suspension
25 or cancellation of such certificate and the other grounds for such suspension
or cancellation under sub-section (2), of section 29;
(p) the class or classes of investors under sub-section (1) of section 30;
(q) the manner in which investment schemes shall be conducted,
operated or promoted including the matters related to contribution or
30 subscription made by an investor under sub-section (3) section 32;
(r) the manner of investment of funds raised or collected under
sub-section (1), and the manner and extent of borrowing and issuing debt
securities by pooled investment vehicles under sub-section (2), of section 33;
(s) the manner of facilitating or providing services related to the issue,
35 sale, purchase or any dealings in securities under sub-section (1), and the
manner and the period within which to charge brokerage, deliver securities
and make payment to an investor under sub-section (2), of section 34;
(t) the information and the frequency thereof under sub-section (1), and
the manner of furnishing information by a securities markets service provider,
40 market participant or a person associated with securities markets under
sub-section (2), of section 35;
(u) the manner and the period to invest money by a securities markets
service provider under sub-section (3) of section 35;
(v) the form, manner and fee for registration as a market infrastructure
45 institution under sub-section (2), and the conditions for the bye-laws of the
applicant, the form and other conditions for grant of registration to the
applicant and the period for rectification of defects in the application for
registration under sub-section (3), of section 37;
64
(w) the manner in which the Board may order to cancel the certificate of
registration of market infrastructure institutions under sub-section (1) of
section 38;
(x) such other matters under clause (u) of sub-section (2) of section 39;
(y) the mechanisms under sub-section (2) of section 41; 5
(z) the conditions under sub-section (1) of section 42;
(za) the manner of management of the board of market infrastructure
institution under sub-section (2), and the manner of demutualisation of market
infrastructure institution under sub-section (3), of section 42;
(zb) the manner of furnishing annual report and other information by 10
market infrastructure institution to the Board under section 43;
(zc) the manner of being admitted as member or client of member or
principal under sub-section (1) of section 52;
(zd) the conditions and procedures for issuance and holding of other
regulated instrument through depositories under clause (b) of sub-section (1) 15
of section 54;
(ze) the manner of surrender of certificate of security or other regulated
instrument under sub-section (1), the time period for completion of the process
of dematerialisation and informing the depository under sub-section (2), and
the period for dematerialisation of the certificate of securities under 2 0
sub-section (4), of section 56;
(zf) the other particulars to be maintained by depository under section 57;
(zg) the rights and obligations of depositories, depository participants
and issuers under sub-section (1), the eligibility criteria for admission of
securities or other regulated instrument on depositories and the manner of 25
holding or transfer of such securities or other regulated instrument under
sub-section (2), the manner of exercising the rights and interest and any other
connected operational or incidental matters under sub-section (3), the manner
of maintaining records by a depository under sub-section (4), and the
procedures and good practices under sub-section (5), of section 62; 30
(zh) the eligibility criteria and requirements for securities to be offered
to public and listed on stock exchange under sub-section (1), the conditions to
be complied by every issuer intending to offer securities to the public or for
listing under sub-section (2), the other conditions where securities are listed
on stock exchange under sub-section (3) and the time period and manner in 35
respect of repayment of all money under sub-section (4), of section 64;
(zi) the requirements and other matters under sub-section (1) of section 65;
(zj) the manner of delisting of securities by stock exchange under
sub-section (1), and the grounds for such delisting under sub-section (2), of
section 66; 40
(zk) the form and manner for implementing the delivery arrangements
by a market infrastructure institution under section 69;
(zl) the manner of making the investor charter and such other matters
concerning the investors under section 71;
(zm) the manner and the period for receiving, monitoring and redressing
45
investor grievance under sub-section (1), and the period for informing the
investor under sub-section (2), of section 72;
65
(zn) the manner and timelines for the grievance redressal under
sub-section (3) of section 73;
(zo) the form and manner of filing a complaint to an Ombudsperson
under sub-section (2) of section 74;
(zp) the amount to be paid to the complainant as damages under
5
clause (c) of sub-section (1) of section 75;
(zq) the other fraudulent or unfair practices in the securities markets
under clause (f) of section 92;
(zr) the other activities which adversely affects the integrity of the
securities markets under clause (g) of section 93;
10
(zs) the conditions and procedures relating to the issuance and the
manner of holding of other regulated instrument through depositories under
sub-section (2) of section 118;
(zt) the other conditions for listing, trading, clearance and settlement of
15
other regulated instrument on a stock exchange under sub-section (2) of
section 119;
(zu) such other persons under clause (b) of sub-section (1) and the
manner of administration and utilisation of the Investor Protection and
20 Education Fund under sub-section (2), of section 125;
(zv) the manner of establishing a regulatory sandbox under
sub-section (1) and the conditions, and procedure in respect of a regulatory
sandbox under clause (c) of sub-section (3), of section 128;
(zw) the manner and conditions of issuing subsidiary instructions under
sub-section (1) of section 149;
25
(zx) the manner of the constitution of Advisory Committees under
section 150;
(zy) such other matter which is required to be, or may be, specified by
regulations or in respect of which provision is to be made by regulations.
147. (1) The Board shall ensure transparency while making regulations by— Process of
30
issuing
(a) publishing draft regulations along with such other details on its website, regulations.
inviting public comments for a specific period prior to issuing regulations;
(b) publishing a general statement of its response to the public
comments, not later than the date of notification of the regulations;
(c) periodically reviewing such regulations.
35
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (1), where the Board is
of the opinion that the regulations are required to be made urgently in public interest,
it may, for reasons to be recorded in writing, dispense with the condition of
publication of draft regulations.
40 148. Every rule, regulation and bye-law made and subsidiary instruction issued Rules,
regulations,
under this Code shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is made or issued, before each
bye-laws and
House of Parliament, while it is in session, for a total period of thirty days which may subsidiary
be comprised in one session or in two or more successive sessions, and if, before the instructions to be
expiry of the session immediately following the session or the successive sessions laid before
Parliament.
45 aforesaid both Houses agree in making any modification in the rule or regulation or
bye-law or subsidiary instruction or both Houses agree that the rule or regulation or
bye-law or subsidiary instruction should not be made or issued, such rule or regulation
or bye-law or subsidiary instruction shall thereafter have effect only in such modified
form or be of no effect, as the case may be; so, however, that any such modification
50 or annulment shall be without prejudice to the validity of anything previously done
under that rule or regulation or bye-law or subsidiary instruction.
66
Subsidiary 149. (1) The Chairperson individually or with a whole-time Member; or two
instructions. whole-time Members of the Board may, issue subsidiary instructions in such manner
and subject to such conditions as may be specified by regulations for the following
purposes, namely:—
(a) clarifying the ambiguity in any regulation, if any; and 5
(b) laying down any procedural requirement ancillary to any regulation:
Provided that before making such instructions, the concerned Advisory
Committee constituted under section 150 may be consulted, if necessary.
(2) Any contravention of the subsidiary instructions shall amount to
contravention of the regulations it relates to. 10
150. The Board may constitute one or more Advisory Committees, in such
Advisory
Committees. manner as may be specified by regulations, to advise it on—
(a) matters relating to the making of subsidiary instructions under
section 149; and
(b) any other issue relating to the administration of this Code: 15
Provided that the advice of or consultation with an Advisory Committee shall
not be binding on the Board.
Power to remove 151. (1) If any difficulty arises in giving effect to the provisions of this Code,
difficulties. the Central Government may, by order published in the Official Gazette, make such
provisions not inconsistent with the provisions of this Code as may appear to it to 20
be necessary or expedient for removing the difficulty:
Provided that no order shall be made under this section after the expiry of three
years from the date of commencement of this Code.
(2) Every order made under this section shall be laid, as soon as may be after
it is made, before each House of Parliament. 25
Repeal and
152. (1) The Securities Contracts (Regulation) Act, 1956, the Securities and 42 of 1956.
saving. Exchange Board of India Act, 1992 and the Depositories Act, 1996 are hereby 15 of 1992.
22 of 1996.
repealed:
Provided that sub-sections (1) and (2) of section 3 and section 15K of the
Securities and Exchange Board of India Act, 1992 shall continue to apply as if that 30 15 of 1992.
Act has not been repealed.
(2) Notwithstanding such repeal,––
(a) if, immediately before the commencement of this Code, there is any
inspection or investigation, application, adjudication, trial or appeal pending,
then such inspection, investigation, application, adjudication, trial or appeal 35
shall be made or held or continued or disposed of, as the case may be, in
accordance with the provisions of the Securities Contracts (Regulation)
Act, 1956, the Securities and Exchange Board of India Act, 1992 and the 42 of 1956.
15 of 1992.
Depositories Act, 1996, as in force immediately before such commencement
(hereinafter referred to as the repealed enactments), as if this Code had not 40
22 of 1996.
come into force;
(b) anything done or any action taken or purported to have been done or
taken, including any rule, notification, regulation, scheme, order or notice
made or issued or any appointment or declaration made or any operation
undertaken or any direction given shall, in so far as it is not inconsistent with 45
the provisions of this Code, be deemed to have been done or taken under the
corresponding provisions of this Code;
67
(c) any order, rule, notification, regulation, circular, guideline, scheme
appointment, conveyance, mortgage, deed, registration, recognition,
document or agreement made or issued, fee directed, resolution passed,
direction given, proceeding initiated, instrument executed or issued, or thing
5 done under or in pursuance of any repealed enactment shall, if in force at the
commencement of this Code have effect as if the aforementioned Acts have
not been repealed;
(d) any principle or rule of law or established jurisdiction, form or course
of pleading, practice or procedure or existing usage, custom, privilege,
10 restriction or exemption shall not be affected, notwithstanding that the same
respectively may have been in any manner affirmed or recognised or derived
by, in, or from, the repealed enactments;
(e) any person appointed under the provisions of the repealed enactments
and holding office as such immediately before the commencement of this
15 Code, shall, on such commencement continue to hold his office under the
corresponding provisions of this Code, unless removed or superannuated;
(f) all funds constituted and established under the repealed enactments
shall be deemed to be the funds constituted or established under the
corresponding provisions of this Code and all money in such funds shall be
20 treated accordingly; and
(g) any jurisdiction, custom, liability, right, title, privilege, restriction,
exemption, usage, practice, procedure or other matter or thing, not in existence
or in force shall not be revised or restored.
(3) The mention of particular matters in sub-section (2) shall not be held to
25 prejudice or affect the general application of section 6 of the General Clauses
10 of 1897. Act, 1897 with regard to the effect of such repeal.
153. Any references in any other enactment or in any instrument to— References to
repealed
enactments.
42 of 1956. (a) the Securities Contracts (Regulation) Act, 1956, the Securities and
15 of 1992. Exchange Board of India Act, 1992 and the Depositories Act, 1996; or
22 of 1996.
30 (b) any rules or regulations or bye-laws made, or any circulars, schemes,
orders or guidelines issued thereunder,
shall unless a different intention appears, be construed as a reference to the
corresponding provisions of this Code, the rules, regulations or bye-laws made, or
orders issued or subsidiary instruction issued thereunder.
35 Explanation.––For the purposes of this section, any references to,––
(a) “participant” as defined under clause (g) of sub-section (1) of
22 of 1996. section 2 of the Depositories Act, 1996, shall mean a depository participant
under the provisions of this Code;
(b) “recognised stock exchange” defined under clause (f) of section 2 of
42 of 1956. 40 the Securities Contracts (Regulation) Act, 1956, shall mean “stock exchange”
as defined under clause (zn) of section 2 of this Code; or
(c) “rules or bye-laws” in relation to the stock exchanges shall mean
“bye-laws” as defined under clause (e) of section 2 of this Code.
68
CHAPTER XVIII
AMENDMENTS TO CERTAIN ACTS
Amendment of 154. The Economic Offences (Inapplicability of Limitation) Act, 1974 shall
Act 12 of 1974. be amended in the manner provided in the First Schedule.
Amendment of 155. The Prevention of Money-laundering Act, 2002 shall be amended in the 5
Act 15 of 2003.
manner provided in the Second Schedule.
Amendment of 156. The Fugitive Economic Offenders Act, 2018 shall be amended in the
Act 17 of 2018.
manner provided in the Third Schedule.
Amendment of 157. The Mediation Act, 2023 shall be amended in the manner provided in the
Act 32 of 2023. 10
Fourth Schedule.
69
THE FIRST SCHEDULE
(See section 154)
AMENDMENT TO THE ECONOMIC OFFENCES (INAPPLICABILITY OF LIMITATION)
ACT, 1974
(12 OF 1974)
In the Economic Offences (Inapplicability of Limitation) Act, 1974, in the
Schedule, after Entry 26, the following entry shall be inserted, namely:—
“27. The Securities Markets Code, 2025.”.
69
70
THE SECOND SCHEDULE
(See section 155)
AMENDMENT TO THE PREVENTION OF MONEY-LAUNDERING ACT, 2002
(15 OF 2003)
In the Prevention of the Money-laundering Act, 2002, in Part A of the
Schedule, for Paragraph 11, the following paragraph shall be substituted, namely:—
“PARAGRAPH 11
OFFENCES UNDER THE SECURITIES MARKETS CODE, 2025
Section Description of offence
93 read with Prohibition of market abuse.
96 Punishment for market abuse.
94 Punishment for failure to comply
with orders.”.
70
71
THE THIRD SCHEDULE
(See section 156)
AMENDMENT TO THE FUGITIVE ECONOMIC OFFENDERS ACT, 2018
(17 OF 2018)
In the Fugitive Economic Offenders Act, 2018, in the Schedule, for Entry VIII,
the following entry shall be substituted, namely:—
“VIII. Offences under the Securities
Markets Code, 2025.
93 read with 96 Prohibition of market abuse.
Punishment for market abuse.
94 Punishment for failure to
comply with orders.”.
71
72
THE FOURTH SCHEDULE
(See section 157)
AMENDMENT TO THE MEDIATION ACT, 2023
(32 OF 2023)
In the Mediation Act, 2023, in the First Schedule, for Entry 11, the following
entry shall be substituted, namely:—
“11. Proceedings before the Board and the Securities Appellate Tribunal
under the Securities Markets Code, 2025.”.
72
73
STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
The sound regulation of securities markets is imperative as such markets are
instrumental for effective mobilization of capital for productive investments, wealth
creation and protection of investors’ confidence.
2. The extant laws relating to the securities markets are primarily (i) the
Securities Contracts (Regulation) Act, 1956 (42 of 1956) enacted to prevent
undesirable transactions in securities by regulating the business of dealings therein;
(ii) the Securities and Exchange Board of India Act, 1992 (15 of 1992) providing
for the establishment of the Securities and Exchange Board of India (the “Board”)
as the primary regulator for the securities markets to protect the interests of investors
in securities and to promote the development of, and to regulate, the securities
market; and (iii) the Depositories Act, 1996 (22 of 1996) that provides for regulation
of depositories in securities. As these laws were enacted decades ago, a review was
required to reform the extant legislative framework to align with the evolving
regulatory practices, latest developments in technology and the changing character
of securities markets.
3. The Securities Markets Code, 2025 seeks to repeal the aforesaid three Acts,
rationalises and consolidates the existing provisions and provides a modern
regulatory framework for investor protection and capital mobilisation at a scale
commensurate with the emerging needs of the fast-growing Indian economy. The
Code endeavours to build a principle based legislative framework to reduce
compliance burden, improve regulatory governance and enhance dynamism of the
technology driven securities markets. The language of the Code has been simplified
to remove obsolete and redundant concepts, to duplication of provisions and
incorporate consistent regulatory procedures for standard processes, and to ensure a
uniform and streamlined framework of Securities Laws. The Code is expected to
further develop the financial sector in general and securities markets in particular
and make India self-reliant in terms of mobilising capital for productive investment.
4. The Code seeks to strengthen the regulatory mechanism of the “Board” by
providing a transparent and consultative process for issuing any subordinate
legislation. It also requires periodic review of such regulations for their
proportionate and effective implementation and regulatory impact assessment
studies. The Code seeks to eliminate conflict of interest by requiring the Members
of the “Board” to disclose any “direct or indirect” interest while participating in
decision-making. It enables the “Board” to maintain a reserve fund and transfer the
surplus, if any, to the Consolidated Fund of India. It streamlines the adjudication
procedure and ensures that all quasi-judicial actions are undertaken through a single
adjudication process after an appropriate fact-finding exercise. The Code maintains
an arm’s length separation between inspection or investigation and adjudication
proceedings and defines timelines for investigations and interim orders for a
time-bound completion of the enforcement process.
5. As a significant progressive step, the Code decriminalises certain
contraventions of minor, procedural and technical nature into civil penalties to
facilitate the ease of doing business and to reduce the compliance burden. The civil
penalties are anchored to unlawful gains or losses caused with a view to ensure
appropriate and adequate response to the gravity of the contraventions. It promotes
standardisation in quantifying unlawful gains and losses to investors and fosters
objectivity in undertaking enforcement actions like penalty imposition. However,
punishment for market abuse is provided to deter persons from committing
contraventions that adversely affect the market integrity. Further, the Code provides
restriction period for initiating inspection or investigation to avoid delayed
enforcement measures.
73
74
6. The Code further seeks to strengthen investor protection, promote investor
education and awareness, and ensure effective and time-bound redressal of investor
grievances. It enables effective and prompt resolution of investor grievances by
introducing the concept of an Ombudsperson as a comprehensive platform for
redressal of any unresolved grievances. The Code also enables the Board to establish
a Regulatory Sandbox to facilitate innovation in financial products, contracts and
services. Furthermore, an enabling framework is established for the inter-regulatory
coordination of other regulated instruments to facilitate a seamless process for
listing of such instruments.
7. The Code also proposes to amend the Economic Offences (Inapplicability
of Limitation) Act, 1974 (12 of 1974), the Prevention of Money-laundering
Act, 2002 (15 of 2003), the Fugitive Economic Offenders Act, 2018 (17 of 2018)
and the Mediation Act, 2023 (32 of 2023) in the manner provided in the Schedules
annexed to the Code.
8. The Notes on Clauses explain in detail the various provisions contained in
the Bill.
9. The Bill seeks to achieve the above objectives.
NEW DELHI; NIRMALA SITHARAMAN.
The 15th December, 2025.
Notes on clauses
Clause 1 of the Bill provides for the short title extent and commencement of
the Code.
Clause 2 of the Bill provides for definition of various terms and expressions
used in the proposed legislation.
Clause 3 of the Bill provides for the Securities and Exchange Board of India
established and incorporated under section 3 of the Securities and Exchange Board
of India Act, 1992, shall be the Board for the purposes of this Code.
Clause 4 of the Bill provides for the composition of the Board.
Clause 5 of the Bill provides for the terms and conditions of service of the
Chairperson and Members of the Board.
Clause 6 of the Bill provides for the circumstances for removal of Chairperson
and Member of the Board.
Clause 7 of the Bill provides for the management of the Board by its Board of
Members and the Chairperson.
Clause 8 of the Bill provides for conduct of the meetings of the Board,
including the requirement to disclose any direct and indirect interest including the
interest of a family member as specified in the regulation.
Clause 9 of the Bill provides for appointment of officers and employees by
the Board.
Clause 10 of the Bill provides that the vacancy or defect in the constitution of
the Board or appointment of Members or irregularity in procedure shall not
invalidate an act or proceedings of the Board.
Clause 11 of the Bill provides that the Board shall protect the interest of investors
in securities and promote the development of, and regulate the securities markets, by
such measures as it may deem fit, subject to the provisions of this Code. It also provides
for specific powers and functions to be exercised or performed by the Board.
Clause 12 of the Bill provides for the powers and functions of the Board to
inspect a securities markets service provider, a market participant or any other
person associated with securities markets in such manner as may be specified by
regulations.
Clause 13 of the Bill provides for the powers and functions of the Board
relating to investigations.
Clause 14 of the Bill provides for general powers and obligations of the
Investigating Officer and also imposes obligations on a person under investigation.
Clause 15 of the Bill provides for powers related to search and seizure in
relation to the investigation conducted by the Investigating Officer.
Clause 16 of the Bill restricts the initiation of inspection and investigation after
eight years, except in specific circumstances. It also specifies how to calculate the
eight year period for different types of defaults or contravention in other
circumstances.
Clause 17 of the Bill provides for the designation of the adjudication officer,
once the inspection or investigation is completed, and where the Board is of the
opinion that adjudication is required. It further provides for disqualification of
certain persons from being appointed as an adjudicating officer to ensure the
separation of functions.
75
76
Clause 18 of the Bill provides for that once the adjudicating officer is
designated, the adjudicating officer shall issue a show cause notice containing the
relevant details for the notice and the noticee shall reply in writing along with
evidence in support; or else the adjudicating officer may proceed to adjudicate the
matter ex parte. Further, the adjudicating officer is vested with the powers of a civil
court.
Clause 19 of the Bill provides a list of factors that shall guide the adjudicating
officer in determining the appropriate action to be taken in a matter, including
its severity.
Clause 20 of the Bill provides for the final order to be passed in adjudication
of a show cause notice. The adjudicating officer may either dismiss the show
cause notice or pass a common order comprising one or more of the actions listed
in this provision.
Clause 21 of the Bill empowers the Board to revise the final order passed by
the adjudicating officer, to increase the quantum of penalty and the severity of the
direction, where the adjudicating officer has decided to take those actions.
Clause 22 of the Bill empowers the adjudicating officer or the Board to rectify
an order for typographical or other inadvertent errors, without modifying the
substantive part of the order.
Clause 23 of the Bill provides for the power of the adjudicating officer to issue
directions or warnings as part of the final order, where the grounds mentioned in
sub-section (1) are satisfied.
Clause 24 of the Bill empowers the adjudicating officer to issue cease and
desist orders, pending adjudication or on completion thereof final order.
Clause 25 of the Bill provides for the power of the adjudicating officer to
disgorge an amount equivalent to the unlawful gains made by the default or
contravention. It also enables the Board to provide restitution to persons affected by
the default or contravention if certain conditions are fulfilled, in accordance with
the procedure specified by the Board.
Clause 26 of the Bill provides for the settlement of administrative and civil
proceedings. It also enables SEBI to consider a settlement application by persons
seeking to voluntarily disclose true and vital information which may amount to a
contravention.
Clause 27 of the Bill provides the power to pass interim orders after the initiation
of the inspection and investigation and before the completion of adjudication. It
further provides that the person concerned shall be given an opportunity of being heard
before an interim order is issued against him; provided, this requirement may be
dispensed with in case of urgency if the conditions for issuing an interim order are
met. It also provides that the interim order shall remain valid for a period not more
than one hundred eighty days which can be extended as per sub-section (4). It also
provides for extension of the interim order up to two years.
Clause 28 of the Bill provides for mandatory registration requirements for
intermediaries, self-regulatory organisations and sponsors of pooled investment
vehicles and investment schemes in the securities markets.
Clause 29 of the Bill provides for the procedures for surrender, suspension
and cancellation of registration of intermediaries and other persons holding a
certificate of registration under clause 28 and the powers of the adjudicating officer
to cancel the registration or suspend it for the period specified by the regulations.
Clause 30 of the Bill provides for the Board to specify by regulations a class
or classes of investors to be registered with it.
77
Clause 31 of the Bill provides for the delegation of powers of registration by
the Board in respect of any class or classes of intermediaries or investors to a market
infrastructure institution or a self-regulatory organisation.
Clause 32 of the Bill provides for the provisions in relation to investment
schemes with different characteristics and the schemes which shall not be treated as
investment schemes.
Clause 33 of the Bill provides for the pooled investment vehicles to mean a
fund that is established for investment scheme in the form of trust etc., and various
provisions for the same.
Clause 34 of the Bill provides for the provisions in relation to intermediaries
which shall provide services related to the issue, sale, purchase or any dealings in
securities.
Clause 35 of the Bill provides for the obligation of securities markets service
providers to make fair disclosure of such information and at such frequency as may
be specified by regulations.
Clause 36 of the Bill provides for the Board to approve the governing norms
of a self-regulatory organisation.
Clause 37 of the Bill provide for the mandatory registration requirements for
market infrastructure institutions to carry out business in the securities markets.
Clause 38 of the Bill provides for cancellation of registration or suspension of
business of market infrastructure institutions in the interest of trade or public
interest. It further provides that no cancellation of registration or suspension of
business shall be made without giving an opportunity of being heard to the applicant.
Clause 39 of the Bill empowers market infrastructure institutions to make
bye-laws and specifies the details therein to be included in the bye-laws.
Clause 40 of the Bill provides the power of the Board to direct bye-laws to be
made or to make such bye-laws.
Clause 41 of the Bill provides that where a member contravenes a bye-law of
a market infrastructure institution, the market infrastructure institution may, by an
order, take measures against such members.
Clause 42 of the Bill provides certain ownership norms for, and the manner of
management of, market infrastructure institutions.
Clause 43 of the Bill provides that a market infrastructure institution shall
furnish a copy of its annual report and such other information in such manner as
may be specified by regulation, to the Board.
Clause 44 of the Bill empowers the Central Government, on the
recommendation of the Board, to supersede the governing board of a market
infrastructure institution or a self-regulatory organisation.
Clause 45 of the Bill provides the circumstances in which the contracts for or
relating to the purchase or sale or any dealings in securities shall be illegal.
Clause 46 of the Bill provides that contracts shall be legal and valid if they are
made in accordance with the provisions of the Code and any rules or
regulations or bye-laws made thereunder and are traded on a stock exchange or
settled by a clearing corporation in accordance with the regulations made by the
Board in this behalf.
Clause 47 of the Bill provides that any contract which is in contravention of
any bye-laws of a stock exchange specified on that behalf, shall be void.
Clause 48 of the Bill lists certain types of contracts which shall not be deemed
to be illegal or require prior permission of the Board.
78
Clause 49 of the Bill empowers the Central Government to notify for
commodity in respect of which a derivatives may be entered into or made by any
person.
Clause 50 of the Bill empowers the Central Government in the public interest or
trade to regulate and control non-transferable specific delivery contracts in commodity
or securities, etc., to declare by notification for the applicability of provision of this Code
for such class or classes of non-transferable specific delivery contracts and spot delivery
contracts for the sale or purchase of such securities.
Clause 51 of the Bill provides for the prohibition of organising or to become
member of any association or entity without any registration regarding performance
of contracts in securities.
Clause 52 of the Bill prohibits persons to deal in securities through market
infrastructure institutions without being a member or a principal.
Clause 53 of the Bill provides the provisions in relation to title to dividends
and income from securities.
Clause 54 of the Bill provides for the powers of the Board in respect of
depository services.
Clause 55 of the Bill provides for that securities and other regulated
instruments in depositories shall be in a dematerialised and fungible form.
Clause 56 of the Bill provides for the process of dematerialisation in respect
of securities and other regulated instruments held by depositories by surrendering
the certificate of securities and other regulated instruments.
Clause 57 of the Bill provides for the requirements relating to the maintenance
of the register and index of beneficial owners by a depository.
Clause 58 of the Bill provides for the manner of registration of the transfer of
a security or other regulated instrument in the name of the transferee which shall be
the conclusive proof of title of the transferee over such security or other regulated
instruments.
Clause 59 of the Bill provides for the manner of creation of a pledge or
hypothecation in respect of securities and other regulated instruments through a
depository by the beneficial owner by the previous approval of the depository.
Clause 60 of the Bill provides for every depository to furnish information and
records and cast duty on issuer to deposit the copy of all relevant records.
Clause 61 of the Bill provides for the rights of registered owners and the
beneficial owner in respect of securities or other regulated instruments held by a
depository.
Clause 62 of the Bill provides for the obligations of a depository in respect of
the securities or other regulated instruments held by it. It further provides the
eligibility criteria for admission of securities and the manner of holding the same
and to maintain records of beneficial owner.
Clause 63 of the Bill provides the application of the Bankers’ Books Evidence
Act, 1891 in relation to a depository as if it were a bank as defined in section 2 of
that Act.
Clause 64 of the Bill provides that no securities shall be offered to the public
or listed on a Stock Exchange without fulfilling the eligibility criteria.
Clause 65 of the Bill empowers the Board to specify by regulations, the listing
and disclosure requirements for issuers. It further provides that the Central
Government may by notification in the public interest, exempt any listed public
sector company from the requirements.
79
Clause 66 of the Bill enables the issuer to apply to the Stock Exchange to delist
its securities. It further provides that the stock exchange may also on its own
delist the securities of an issuer subject to giving an opportunity of hearing to the
issuer.
Clause 67 of the Bill provides that the stock exchange may refuse to list or
delist the securities of an issuer with reasons.
Clause 68 of the Bill provides for the manner of netting and settlement of
transactions undertaken on a stock exchange or clearing corporation.
Clause 69 of the Bill provides for the Market Infrastructure Institution to
implement delivery arrangements in respect of contracts of securities as per the
regulations.
Clause 70 of the Bill provides precedence over other attachments to dues to
be recovered by a clearing corporation in furtherance of its clearing and settlement
functions.
Clause 71 of the Bill empowers the Board to specify by regulations, an
investor charter providing principles for the protection of investors and facilitation
of their participation in the securities markets and such other matters concerning the
investors.
Clause 72 of the Bill provides for the Board to specify by regulation an
investor grievance redressal mechanism and also direct a securities markets service
provider and an issuer to provide investor grievance redressal mechanisms.
Clause 73 of the Bill empowers the Board to designate one or more of its
officer as an Ombudsperson to receive and redress the grievances of investors.
Clause 74 of the Bill provides that the investor shall first resolve his grievance
through the investor grievance redressal mechanisms referred to in section 72 within
a period of one hundred and eighty days from the date of first filing of such
grievance in any of these mechanisms. It further provides that if the grievance is not
resolved within this period, the investor may choose to continue the resolution
through these mechanisms or, within thirty days after the completion of this period,
file a complaint with the Ombudsperson. It also provides an explanation to explain
the meaning of deficiency in service. It also provides that a complaint cannot be
filed before the Ombudsperson if a person has initiated a proceeding under any other
law in respect of a matter that is directly or substantially in issue in such a complaint.
Clause 75 of the Bill provides that the Ombudsperson may pass an order to
direct the respondent to comply with its obligation; return the fee; pay damages;
etc., to the complainant after giving him an opportunity of being heard and such
order shall be binding to both the parties.
Clause 76 of the Bill provides that while redressing a complaint, if the
Ombudsperson is of the opinion that the respondent has contravened any provisions
of the Code or the rules or regulations made thereunder, he may inform the Board
of such contravention.
Clause 77 of the Bill provides that the Ombudsperson shall have certain
powers of a civil court.
Clause 78 of the Bill provides that any order of an Ombudsperson shall not
prevent the Board from taking any other action under the Code.
Clause 79 of the Bill provides that the Securities Appellate Tribunal
established under section 15K of the Securities and Exchange Board of India Act,
1992 shall be the Securities Appellate Tribunal, for the purposes of the Code.
Clause 80 of the Bill provides for the composition of the Tribunal and its
Benches.
80
Clause 81 of the Bill provides for the appointment, qualifications, terms and
conditions of service of the Presiding Officer and other Members of the Tribunal as
per the applicable law. It further provides that on the date of commencement of the
Code, the Presiding Officer and the Member of the Tribunal shall continue in their
office till the remaining period of the tenure unless removed under the provisions of
the applicable law.
Clause 82 of the Bill provides for the filling up of the vacancies in the office
of the Presiding Officer or any other Member of the Tribunal.
Clause 83 of the Bill provides for the senior-most Judicial Member to act as
Presiding Officer in case of vacancy in his office.
Clause 84 of the Bill provides for the officers and employees of the Tribunal.
It further provides the officers and employees shall discharge their function under
the General Superintendence of the Presiding Officer. It also provides that the
Central Government may by rules provides for their salaries, allowance and other
condition of service.
Clause 85 of the Bill provides for the appeal to the Tribunal. It provides for
the orders or decisions against which an appeal can be made to the Tribunal. It
further provides that the appeal may be filed within a period of fourty-five days
from the date of order made to the Board. It also provides a proviso
empowering the Tribunal to entertain an appeal beyond the said period with
sufficient reasons.
Clause 86 of the Bill provides the powers of the Tribunal that of a civil court
and shall follow the principle of natural justice. It further provides that proceeding
before the Tribunal shall be deemed to a judicial proceeding within the meaning of
Bharatiya Nyaya Sanhita, 2023. It also provides for various provisions of Presiding
Officer.
Clause 87 of the Bill provides for that the order constituting the Tribunal shall
be final and vacancies or defects in the constitution of the Tribunal, will not
invalidate proceedings of the Tribunal.
Clause 88 of the Bill provides for the right to legal representation of a party
before the Tribunal, either by itself or through persons authorised by such party.
Clause 89 of the Bill provides for the applicability of the provisions of the
Limitation Act, 1963, as far as they apply to an appeal made to the Tribunal.
Clause 90 of the Bill provides that the Presiding Officer, Members and other
officers and employees of the Tribunal be deemed as “public servants” within the
meaning of clause (28) of section 2 of the Bharatiya Nyaya Sanhita, 2023.
Clause 91 of the Bill provides for the appeal to the Supreme Court within a
period of sixty days from the date of communication of the decision or orders of the
Tribunal by any aggrieved person. It further provides that the Supreme Court may
entertain an appeal after the period of sixty days with sufficient cause.
Clause 92 of the Bill lists certain prohibited practices and dealings in securities
which pertain to fraudulent or unfair practices such as use of any manipulative or
deceptive device in connection with issue, purchase, sale or any dealing in
securities; defraud in connection with issue or dealing in securities; make any false
or fraudulent entry in any record; etc.
Clause 93 of the Bill lists certain grave acts which adversely affect the
integrity of the market which are categorised as market abuse such as engage in
insider trading, deal in securities while in possession of material or non-public
information, place any order in securities while directly or indirectly in possession
of information which is not publicly available, etc.
81
Clause 94 of the Bill provides for imprisonment for a term which shall not be
less than one month but may extend to ten years or with fine of not less than ten lakh
rupees but may extend to twenty-five crore rupees or both, if a person fails to comply
with the interim order or the final order made under Chapter III.
Clause 95 of the Bill provides for the punishment for failure to comply with
the directions of the Investigating Officer.
Clause 96 of the Bill provides for the imprisonment for a term which shall not
be less than one month but may extend to ten years or with fine of not less than ten
lakh rupees but may extend to twenty-five crore rupees or both, if any person
contravenes, attempts to contravene, or abets the commission of market abuse.
Clause 97 of the Bill provides for the penalty for failure in obtaining
certificates of registration, failure to furnish correct information or documents, etc.
It further provides a monetary range for defaults or contraventions mentioned under
sections 97 to 102 and section 109, within which the adjudicating officer shall
impose an appropriate penalty while passing the final order for respective default or
contravention. It also provides that the minimum penalty amount that should be
imposed is fixed, the maximum penalty amount that can be imposed is linked to
unlawful gains made by the defaulter or contravener, or loss caused to an investor
or other persons and such quantification will depend on the facts and circumstances
of each matter, and the criteria and manner for quantifying unlawful gains and losses
will be specified in the regulations to ensure uniformity and certainty. It also
provides that in cases where the unlawful gains or losses caused are not quantifiable,
the maximum penalty amount is specifically provided.
Clause 98 of the Bill provides for the penalty for failure to invest the money
collected by a securities markets service provider. It further provides that person who
fails to comply with any provisions of this code, rules or regulations made thereunder or
directions issued by the board or the bye-laws of a market infrastructure institution.
Clause 99 of the Bill provides for the penalty for contravention by stock
brokers.
Clause 100 of the Bill provides for the penalty for failure to redress the
grievances of investors.
Clause 101 of the Bill provides for the penalty for failure to dematerialise
certificates of securities.
Clause 102 of the Bill provides for the penalty for failure to reconcile the
records of dematerialised securities with all the securities issued by the issuer as per
the regulations.
Clause 103 of the Bill provides for the penalty for other non-compliances. It
provides a higher monetary range for defaults or contraventions mentioned under
sections 103 to 108, within which the adjudicating officer shall impose an
appropriate penalty while passing the final order for the respective default or
contravention. It further provides that while the minimum penalty amount that
should be imposed is fixed, the maximum penalty amount that can be imposed is
linked to unlawful gains made by the defaulter or contravener, or loss caused to an
investor or other persons. It also provides that such the quantification will depend
on the facts and circumstances of each matter, and the criteria and manner for
quantifying unlawful gains and losses will be specified in the regulations to ensure
uniformity and certainty. It also provides that in case of these severe defaults or
contraventions; there may be circumstances where the quantifiable unlawful gains
or losses are relatively small. and the adjudicating officer may impose a higher
penalty. It also provides that in cases where the unlawful gains or losses caused are
not quantifiable, the maximum penalty amount is specifically provided.
Clause 104 of the Bill provides a penalty for failure of a market
infrastructure institution to conduct its business in accordance with the provisions
of this Code.
82
Clause 105 of the Bill provides a penalty for failure to furnish periodical
returns, etc., by any market infrastructure institution or any self-regulatory
organisation.
Clause 106 of the Bill provides a penalty for failure to comply with orders of
an Ombudsperson.
Clause 107 of the Bill provides a penalty for default by persons managing a
pooled investment vehicle.
Clause 108 of the Bill provides for a penalty for dematerialisation of securities
in excess of the issued securities of a company or delivery of unlisted securities.
Clause 109 of the Bill is a residuary penalty provision for contraventions
where no separate penalty is provided under the Code.
Clause 110 of the Bill provides for the liability of certain persons where a
company commits a contravention, whether or not it results in a penalty or
punishment. It further clarifies the extent of liability for independent and
non-executive directors of a company in such circumstances and aligns it with the
Companies Act, 2013.
Clause 111 of the Bill specifies the additional factors for imposition of penalty
under sections 97 to 109. In addition to the factors mentioned in clause 19, the
adjudicating officer shall also take into account—(a) the amount required to be
disgorged and (b) any aggravating and mitigating circumstances. Disgorgement
restores the noticee to its pre-contravention position, while penalties are imposed to
ensure effective deterrence. When both actions are being undertaken, the
adjudicating officer will harmonise the total monetary liability to serve these distinct
objectives.
Clause 112 of the Bill provides for crediting all sums realised by way of
penalties by the Board to the Consolidated Fund of India.
Clause 113 of the Bill provides for the establishment or designation of Special
Courts for the trial of offences under the Code.
Clause 114 of the Bill provides for the appeals and revisions from the Special
Court to the High Court concerned.
Clause 115 of the Bill provides that subject to certain exceptions, the
provisions of the Bharatiya Nagarik Suraksha Sanhita, 2023 shall apply to the
proceedings before the Special Court.
Clause 116 of the Bill provides that a court can take cognizance of an offence
under the Code only upon written complaint made by the Board, or an officer or
person authorised by it.
Clause 117 of the Bill provides for the compounding of offences under the
Code by court or Tribunal, as the case may be. It provides that the offences under
the Code may be compounded by—(i) the Tribunal, either before or after the
proceedings related to such offences are instituted before the court, or (ii) the court,
before which such proceedings are pending. It further provides that a person cannot
apply for compounding of an offence committed by him within a period of three
years from the date on which a similar offence committed by him was compounded
under this section.
Clause 118 of the Bill provides for the manner in which other regulated
instruments would be issued or held through depositories. It further provides that
the Board may in consultation with other regulatory authority specify the conditions
and procedure of issuance and holding of other regulated instrument through
depositories.
83
Clause 119 of the Bill provides for the manner of listing and trading of other
regulated instruments. It also provides that the other regulated instruments which is
listed on a stock exchange shall be listed, traded, cleared and settled in accordance
with the provisions of this Code and shall be subject to other conditions that are
specified by the Board in consultation with other regulated authority.
Clause 120 of the Bill enables the Board to enter into a memorandum of
understanding with other regulatory authority for various purposes.
Clause 121 of the Bill provides for the general conditions applicable on the
Board and other regulatory authority, while exercising their powers or
performing their functions under this Chapter such as to facilitate investor
participation, ensure investor protection, promote the orderly development of
securities markets, etc.
Clause 122 of the Bill empowers the Board to take action against a person who
are registered with other regulatory authority in case of contravention of the
provisions of the Code. It also provides that where the Board is of the opinion that
such person has contravened the provisions of the law under which it is registered,
it shall inform the concerned other regulatory authority about the contravention for
taking appropriate action.
Clause 123 of the Bill provides for grants by the Central Government to the
Board.
Clause 124 of the Bill provides that the General Fund, established under
section 14 of the Securities and Exchange Board of India Act, 1992, shall be deemed
to be the Fund for the purposes of the Code.
Clause 125 of the Bill provides that the Investor Protection and Education
Fund established under the Securities and Exchange Board of India (Investor
Protection and Education Fund) Regulations, 2009 shall be deemed to be the
Investor Protection and Education Fund for the purposes of the Code.
Clause 126 of the Bill provides for the Board to maintain accounts and audit
of the accounts by the Comptroller and Auditor-General of India.
Clause 127 of the Bill provides for furnishing of returns and reports by the
Board to the Central Government within the period of ninety days after the end of
each previous financial year. It also provides that a copy of the report shall be laid
before each House of Parliament.
Clause 128 of the Bill provides the establishment of a regulatory sandbox for
development of new products, contracts, or services in the securities markets.
Clause 129 of the Bill provides for the regulation of the National Institute of
Securities Markets for capacity building of intermediaries.
Clause 130 of the Bill provides that the Members, officers and employees of
the Board to be public servants.
Clause 131 of the Bill provides for the power of the Central Government to
issue directions to the Board.
Clause 132 of the Bill provides for the delegation of certain powers by the
Board except the powers under sections 128, 146 and 149.
Clause 133 of the Bill empowers the Central Government to supersede the
Board for the circumstances mentioned therein. It further empowers the Central
Government to take over all powers and functions of the Board on being superseded
which shall be exercised by such persons as the Central Government may direct. It
also empowers the Central Government to reconstitute the Board by fresh
appointment.
84
Clause 134 of the Bill provides for the requirement to maintain confidentiality
of the regulatory data under the Code by the Board (its officers, employees)
and its Members, a market infrastructure institution and a self-regulatory
organisation (including their officers, employees and the members of their
governing boards).
Clause 135 of the Bill empowers the Central Government, on the
recommendation of the Board, to grant immunity to any person who is alleged to
have contravened the provision of this Code or rules, regulations or bye-laws made
thereunder subject to conditions mentioned therein.
Clause 136 of the Bill provides for the procedure for recovery of amounts in
case of failure by any person by various mode provided therein.
Clause 137 of the Bill provides for the continuance of proceedings under the
Code after the death of a person.
Clause 138 of the Bill provides for the bar of jurisdiction of courts in certain
cases in respect of quasi-judicial proceedings under the Code.
Clause 139 of the Bill provides for the protection from the legal proceeding to
the Central Government or any of its officers or the Board, any member of the Board
or its officers and employees for any action taken in good faith.
Clause 140 of the Bill provides for an exemption to Board from paying certain
taxes.
Clause 141 of the Bill provides that the power of the Board does not apply to
the International Financial Services Centre.
Clause 142 of the Bill provides provisions of this Code shall be in addition to,
and not in derogation of the provisions of any other law for the time being
in force.
Clause 143 of the Bill provides that the Code will not apply in certain cases.
Clause 144 of the Bill empowers the Central Government to delegate its
powers under the Code except the powers under sections 131,135 and 145.
Clause 145 of the Bill empowers the Central Government to make rules under
the Code for various provisions enumerated therein. It further provides that the
Central Government shall, before making any rules, comply with the condition of
previous publication. It also empowers the Central Government to dispense with the
requirements of previous publication in case of urgency in the public interest, for
reasons to be recorded in writing.
Clause 146 of the Bill provides for the power of the Board to make regulations.
In addition to the general powers of the Board to make regulations for carrying out
the purposes of this Code, this provision provides a list of subject matter for which
the specifications shall be through regulations.
Clause 147 of the Bill provides the procedure for issuing regulations by the
Board. The Board shall, before making a regulation, invite public comment on the
draft of the regulations. It further provides that the Board will provide an
appropriate, reasonable period for inviting public comments and will also give a
general statement of its response to the public comments. It also provides that this
requirement may be dispensed with in case of urgency in the public interest, for
reasons to be recorded in writing. It also provides that the Board shall periodically
review the regulations made by it.
Clause 148 of the Bill provides that the rules, regulations, bye-laws and
subsidiary instructions made under this Code be laid before the Parliament.
85
Clause 149 of the Bill provides the manner of issuing subsidiary instructions
by the Board that clarify existing regulations or define the procedures ancillary to a
regulation. It further provides that a subsidiary instruction can be issued by—(i) the
Chairperson, individually or with a whole-time Member, or (ii) two whole-time
Members. It also provides that the Board will also specify the manner and conditions
for issuing subsidiary instructions.
Clause 150 of the Bill provides for the constitution of the Advisory
Committees by the Board. It further provides that the Board may consult the
Advisory Committee if it considers it necessary. It also provides that such
consultation or advice shall not be binding.
Clause 151 of the Bill empowers the Central Government by order to remove
difficulties that may arise in giving effect to the provisions of the Code. It further
provides that no order shall be made after the expiry of a period of three years.
Clause 152 of the Bill provides for the repeal and savings of the existing
enactments governing the securities markets and facilitates the transition from such
repealed enactments to the provisions of the Code.
Clause 153 of the Bill provides that any reference to repealed enactments to
be construed as a reference to the Code and the corresponding provisions.
Clause 154 of the Bill provides that the Economic Offences (Inapplicability
of Limitation) Act, 1974 be amended in the manner provided in the First Schedule
to align with the provisions of the Code.
Clause 155 of the Bill provides that the Prevention of Money-laundering
Act, 2002 be amended in the manner provided in the Second Schedule to align with
the provisions of the Code.
Clause 156 of the Bill provides that the Fugitive Economic Offenders
Act, 2018 shall be amended in the manner provided in the Third Schedule to align
with the provisions of the Code.
Clause 157 of the Bill provides that the Mediation Act, 2023 shall be amended
in the manner provided in the Fourth Schedule to align with the provisions of the
Code.
FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM
The Securities Markets Code, 2025, if enacted, is not likely to involve any
expenditure, either recurring or non-recurring, from and out of the Consolidated
Fund of India.
86
87
MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION
1. Sub-clause (1) of clause 145 of the Bill empowers the Central Government
to make rules for carrying out the provisions of the proposed legislation.
Sub-clause (2) of the said clause specifies the matters in respect of which such rules
may be made. These matters, inter alia, includes—
(a) the manner of appointment of Chairperson and Members under
sub-section (3) of section 4; (b) the other terms and conditions of service of
Chairperson and members under sub-section (3) of section 5; (c) the other
functions of the Board under clause (z) of sub-section (2) of section 11; (d) the
manner of crediting settlement amount to the Consolidated Fund of India
under sub-section (8) of section 26; (e) the salaries, allowances and conditions
of service of the officers and employees of the Tribunal under sub-section (3)
of section 84; (f) the form, manner and fee for filing an appeal under
sub-section (3) of section 85; (g) the other matters under clause (h) of
sub-section (2) of section 86; (h) the manner of crediting all sums realised by
way of penalty into Consolidated Fund of India under section 112; (i) the terms
and conditions and the sums payable under sub-section (1) of section 117; (j)
the form for maintaining proper accounts, other relevant records and the
preparation of annual statement of account along with the accounts of the
Investor Protection and Education Fund under sub-section (1) of section 126;
(k) the time, form and manner of furnishing returns, statements and particulars
in regard to any proposed or existing programme for the promotion and
development of securities markets under sub-section (1) of section 127; (l) the
form for submitting report, giving a true and full account of activities, policies
and programmes during the financial year under sub-section (2) of
section 127; (m) any matter which is to be or may be prescribed or in respect
of which provisions is to be made by rules.
2. Sub-clause (1) of clause 146 of the Bill empowers the Board to make
regulations for carrying out the provisions of the proposed legislation.
Sub-clause (2) of the said clause specifies the matters in respect of which such
regulations may be made. These matters, inter alia, includes—
(a) the other services for the purposes of the definition of depository
services under sub-clause (iv) of clause (l) of section 2; (b) the form of records
under clause (ze) of sub-section (1) of section 2; (c) the time and place, the
rules of procedure of transaction of business at the meetings of the Board,
including quorum and the manner of maintaining arrangements for recording,
safe-keeping and for taking decisions and publication thereof under
sub-section (1) of section 8; (d) such direct or indirect interest, including the
interest of any family member, under sub-section (4) of section 8; (e) the
qualifications, method of recruitment and the terms and conditions of service
of officers and employees of the Board under sub-section (2) of section 9;
(f) the manner for undertaking inspection of a securities markets service
provider, a market participant or any other person associated with the
securities markets under section 12; (g) the manner of seeking assistance by
the Board of a securities markets service provider or an expert to assist the
Investigating Officer under sub-section (1), the form of the order directing
investigation under sub-section (2), the criteria and manner of quantification
of unlawful gains or losses under sub-section (3) and the procedure of
conducting investigation under sub-section (5), of section 13; (h) the form and
manner of serving notice by the Investigating Officer under sub-section (6) of
section 14; (i) the rank of officer to be designated as an adjudicating officer
under sub-section (1) of section 17; (j) the manner for conducting adjudication
proceedings under sub-section (4) of section 17; (k) the relevant document and
particulars to be enclosed with a show cause notice under sub-section (1) of
section 18; (l) the procedure, the criteria for distribution of disgorged amount,
87
88
the order of priority and the other conditions to provide restitution from the
disgorged amount under sub-section (2) of section 25; (m) the conditions, the
fee, the time and manner of filing an application for settlement of proceedings
initiated or to be initiated under sub-section (1), the members, the terms and
conditions for constitution of committee for advising the Board under
sub-section (2), the other factors for settlement proceedings under sub-section
(3) and the manner for conducting settlement proceedings under sub-section
(6), of section 26; (n) the form and manner, the eligibility criteria and fee
payable and the period for rectification of the defects in the application for
registration under sub-section (2) and the form and manner, the terms and
conditions and the time period for issuing a certificate of registration and any
additional conditions under sub-section (3), of section 28; (o) the form and
manner and the conditions for surrendering the certificate of registration under
sub-section (1), and the period of suspension or cancellation of such certificate
and the other grounds for such suspension or cancellation under
sub-section (2), of section 29; (p) the class or classes of investors under
sub-section (1) of section 30; (q) the manner in which investment schemes
shall be conducted, operated or promoted including the matters related to
contribution or subscription made by an investor under sub-section (3) or
section 32; (r) the manner of investment of funds raised or collected under
sub-section (1), and the manner and extent of borrowing and issuing debt
securities by pooled investment vehicles under sub-section (2), of section 33;
(s) the manner of facilitating or providing services related to the issue, sale,
purchase or any such dealings in securities under sub-section (1), and the
manner and the period within which to charge brokerage, deliver securities
and make payment to an investor under sub-sections (2), of section 34; (t) the
fair disclosure of information and the frequency thereof under sub-section (1)
and, the manner of furnishing information by a securities markets service
provider, market participant or a person associated with securities markets
under sub-section (2), of section 35; (u) the manner and the period to invest
money by a securities markets service provider under sub-section (3) of
section 35; (v) the form, manner and fee for registration as a market
infrastructure institution under sub-section (2) and, the conditions for the
bye-laws of the applicant, the form and other conditions for grant of
registration to the applicant and the period for rectification of defects in the
application for registration under sub-section (3), of section 37; (w) the manner
in which the Board may order to cancel the certificate of registration of market
infrastructure institutions under sub-section (1) of section 38; (x) such other
matters under clause (u) of sub-section (2) of section 39; (y) the mechanisms
under sub-section (2) of section 41; (z) the conditions under sub-section (1) of
section 42; (za) the manner of management of the board of market
infrastructure institution under sub-section (2) and the manner of
demutualisation of market infrastructure institution under sub-section (3) of
section 42; (zb) the manner of furnishing annual report and other information
by market infrastructure institution to the Board under section 43; (zc) the
manner of being admitted as member or client of member or principal under
sub-section (1) of section 52; (zd) the conditions and procedures for issuance
and holding of other regulated instrument through depositories under
clause (b) of sub-section (1) of section 54; (ze) the manner of surrender of
certificate of security or other regulated instrument under sub-section (1), the
time period for completion of the process of dematerialisation and informing
the depository under sub-section (2), and the period for dematerialisation of
the certificate of securities under sub-section (4), of section 56; (zf) the other
particulars to be maintained by depository under section 57; (zg) the rights and
obligations of depositories, depository participants and issuers under
sub-section (1), the eligibility criteria for admission of securities or other regulated
89
instrument on depositories and the manner of holding or transfer of such
securities and other regulated instrument under sub-section (2), the manner of
exercising the rights and interest and any other operational or incidental
matters under sub-section (3), the manner of maintaining records by a
depository under sub-section (4), and the procedures and good practices under
sub-section (5), of section 62; (zh) the eligibility criteria and requirements for
securities to be offered to public and listed on stock exchange under
sub-section (1), the conditions to be complied by every issuer intending to
offer securities to the public or for listing under sub-section (2), the other
conditions where securities are listed on stock exchange under sub-section (3)
and the time period and manner in respect of repayment of all money under
sub-section (4), of section 64; (zi) the requirements and other matters under
sub- section (1) of section 65; (zj) the manner of delisting of securities by stock
exchange under sub-sections (1) and the grounds for such delisting under
sub-section (2), of section 66; (zk) the form and manner for implementing the
delivery arrangements by a market infrastructure institution under section 69;
(zl) the manner of making the investor charter and such other matters
concerning the investors under section 71; (zm) the manner and the period for
receiving, monitoring and redressing investor grievance under sub-section (1)
and the period for informing the investor under sub-section (2), of section 72;
(zn) the manner and timelines for the grievance redressal under sub-section (3)
of section 73; (zo) the form and manner of filing a complaint to an
Ombudsperson under sub-section (2) of section 74; (zp) the amount to be paid
to the complainant as damages under clause (c) of sub-section (1) of
section 75; (zq) the other fraudulent or unfair practices in the securities
markets under clause (f) of section 92; (zr) the other activities which adversely
affects the integrity of the securities markets under clause (g) of section 93;
(zs) the conditions and procedures relating to the issuance and the manner of
holding of other regulated instrument through depositories under
sub-section (2) of section 118; (zt) the other conditions for listing, trading,
clearance and settlement of other regulated instrument on a stock exchange
under sub-section (2) of section 119; (zu) the grants and donations to other
persons under clause (b) of sub-section (1) and the manner of administration
and utilisation of the Investor Protection and Education Fund under
sub-section (2), of section 125; (zv) the manner of establishing a regulatory
sandbox under sub-section (1) and the conditions and procedure for making
an application under clause (c) of sub-section (3), of section 128; (zw) the
manner and conditions of issuing subsidiary instructions under
sub-section (1) of section 149; (zx) the manner of the constitution of Advisory
Committees under section 150; (zy) such other matter which is required to be,
or may be, specified by regulations or in respect of which provision is to be
made by regulations.
3. Sub-clause (1) of clause 39 of the Bill empowers a market infrastructure
institution to make bye-laws for carrying out the provisions of the proposed
legislation. Sub-clause (2) of the said clause enumerates the matters in respect of
which such bye-laws may be made which includes—
(a) the appropriate mechanisms for safeguarding the interests of any
investors in securities and beneficial owners thereof; (b) the manner of
holding, custody, pledging, hypothecation, lending, borrowing, issue, transfer,
trading, transmission, conversion, transformation, consolidation, switching,
clearing, delivery, settlement and other dealings in securities; (c) the risk
management and abuse prevention measures such as imposition of margins,
position and price limits, circuit breakers, collateral management, auction of
short positions, order restrictions, account suspensions, server placement and
90
other technical requirements; (d) the particular bye-laws, the contravention of
which shall make a contract entered into otherwise than in accordance with
the bye-laws void under section 47; (e) the terms and conditions for accessing
any services provided by the market infrastructure institution; (f) the listing of
securities, the inclusion of any security for the purpose of dealings and the
suspension or withdrawal of any such securities, and the suspension or
prohibition of trading in securities; (g) the procedure for disbursing of interest,
dividend, bonus and other monetary benefits arising from the holding, transfer,
or any dealings in securities; (h) the norms of fair and time-bound disclosure
of material information by issuers; (i) the internal control standards such as
audits, review and monitoring; (j) the inter-se rights and obligations of
members and market participants; (k) the terms, conditions and incidents of
contracts, including the prescription of margin requirements, if any, and the
conditions relating thereto, and the forms of contracts in writing; (l) the
content, form and manner of executing member-client agreements; (m) the
measures relating to regulation of fees charged by members, dealings by
members for their own account, maintenance of separation of client funds and
securities; (n) the process of accrediting or empanelling persons providing
services in connection with any dealings in securities; (o) the procedure for
conveying information to members and market participants; (p) the levy and
recovery of fees and penalties; (q) the conduct of inspections, filing of
information and such other matters in relation to regulation of its members;
(r) the obligations of members to supply such information or explanation and
to produce such documents relating to their business as may be sought by the
market infrastructure institution; (s) the procedure for the settlement of claims
or disputes or grievances including settlement by mediation or arbitration
including through electronic means; (t) the manner of conducting proceedings
against the members and market participants for committing breach of the
bye-laws and provisions for suspension, expulsion of members and market
participants and cancellation of agreements with the market infrastructure
institution; (u) other matters as may be specified by regulations;
(w) sub-section (5) of section 39 empowers the Board to make bye-laws over
the matter enumerated under sub-section (2) thereof.
4. The matters in respect of which rules, regulations, subsidiary instructions
or bye-laws, may be made or issued under the aforesaid provisions are matters of
procedure and administrative detail and it is not practicable to provide for them in
the Bill itself. The delegation of legislative power is, therefore, of a normal
character.
ANNEXURE
EXTRACT FROM THE ECONOMIC OFFENCES (INAPPLICABILITY OF LIMITATION)
ACT, 1974
(12 OF 1974)
* * * * *
THE SCHEDULE
(See section 2)
* * * * *
26. The Goods and Services (Compensation to States) Act, 2017 (15 of 2017).
————
EXTRACT FROM THE PREVENTION OF MONEY-LAUNDERING ACT, 2002
(15 OF 2003)
* * * * *
THE SCHEDULE
[See section 2(y)]
PART A
* * * * *
PARAGRAPH 11
OFFENCES UNDER THE SECURITIES AND EXCHANGE BOARD OF
INDIA ACT, 1992
(15 OF 1992)
Section Description of offence
12A read with Prohibition of manipulative and deceptive devices, insider
section 24 trading and substantial.
24 Acquisition of securities or control.
* * * * *
————
EXTRACT FROM THE FUGITIVE ECONOMIC OFFENDERS ACT, 2018
(17 OF 2018)
* * * * *
THE SCHEDULE
[See section 2(l) and (m)]
VIII. Offences under the Securities and Exchange Board of India Act, 1992
(15 of 1992)
Section Description of offence
12A read with Prohibition of manipulative and deceptive devices, insider
section 24 trading and substantial acquisition of securities or control.
24 Offences for contravention of the provisions of the Act.
* * * * *
————
91
92
EXTRACT FROM THE MEDIATION ACT, 2023
(32 OF 2023)
* * * * *
THE FIRST SCHEDULE
(See section 6)
DISPUTES OR MATTERS NOT FIT FOR MEDIATION
* * * * *
11. Proceedings before the Securities and Exchange Board of India, and the
Securities Appellate Tribunal, under the Securities and Exchange Board of India
Act, 1992 (15 of 1992).
* * * * *
LOK SABHA
————
A
BILL
to consolidate and amend the laws relating to the securities markets and for
matters connected therewith or incidental thereto.
————
(Smt. Nirmala Sitharaman, Minister of Finance and Corporate Affairs)
LOK SABHA
------
CORRIGENDUM
to
The Securities Markets Code, 2025
[To be/As introduced in Lok Sabha]
S. No. Page No. Line(s) No. For Read
1. Page 59, against line 39,-
insert marginal citation “30 of 2025.”
NEW DELHI;
December 17, 2025________
Agrahayana 26, 1947 (Saka)
