AS INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA
Bill No. 65 of 2025
THE INDIAN PORTS BILL, 2025
ARRANGEMENT OF CLAUSES
————
CHAPTER I
PRELIMINARY
CLAUSES
1. Short title, commencement and application.
2. Definitions.
CHAPTER II
MARITIME STATE DEVELOPMENT COUNCIL
3. Establishment of Council.
4. Powers of Chairperson.
5. Vacancies, etc., not to invalidate proceedings of Council.
6. Functions of Council.
7. Employees of Council.
8. Grants by Central Government.
9. Delegation of powers of Council.
CHAPTER III
PORT AND PORT LIMITS
10. Port operations.
11. Notification of new port and alteration of port limits.
12. Adherence to national perspective plan and guidelines issued by the
Council.
CHAPTER IV
STATE MARITIME BOARDS
13. Establishment of State Maritime Board.
14. Transfer of assets and liabilities, etc.
15. Functions of State Maritime Board.
CHAPTER V
ADJUDICATION OF DISPUTES
16. Resolution of disputes.
17. Civil court not to have jurisdiction.
CHAPTER VI
PORT OFFICERS
18. Appointment of conservator, harbour master and other port officers.
19. Powers of conservator to issue directions.
20. Removal of obstructions within port limits.
21. Power to specify restrictions on activities within port limits.
22. Fouling of moorings.
23. Power to board vessels and enter buildings.
(ii)
CLAUSES
24. Appointment and powers of health officer and prevention of contagious
diseases.
25. Indemnity of Government against act or default of port officers or pilot.
CHAPTER VII
SAFETY AND CONSERVATION OF PORTS
26. Damage to property of port.
27. Warping.
28. Master to take order to extinguish fire.
29. Offences in connection with safety of vessels, etc.
30. Unauthorised person not to search for lost stores.
31. Injuring banks or shores of port prohibited.
32. Moving of vessels without pilot or permission of harbour master or port
officer.
33. Port officer to co-operate in manoeuvres for defence of port.
34. Authority and Director-General to regulate certain activities.
CHAPTER VIII
PREVENTION, CONTAINMENT OF POLLUTION AND RESPONSE
35. Definitions.
36. Reception facilities.
37. Direction to provide adequate reception facilities.
38. Port waste reception and handling plans.
39. Advance waste notice.
40. Delivery of vessel-generated waste.
41. Charges for vessel-generated waste.
42. Audit of ports.
43. Maintenance of information on portal.
44. Measures for prevention or containment of pollution.
45. Directions for securing compliance.
CHAPTER IX
LEVY OF FEES AND OTHER CHARGES
46. Levy of fees and other charges.
47. Port tariff.
48. Receipt of fees or other charges.
49. Owner, agent or master to report arrival.
50. Detention and sale on refusal to pay fees or other charges.
51. Grant of port-clearance.
52. Master not to evade payment of fees or other charges.
(iii)
CHAPTER X
PENALTIES AND PROCEDURES
CLAUSES
53.Offences and penalties.
54.Authority for imposition of penalty and procedure therefor.
55.Cognizance of offences.
56.Penalty for wilful failure to comply with orders of Dispute Resolution
Committee.
57.Penalty for failure to furnish information, etc.
58.Recovery of fine or penalty.
59.Recovery of expenses and damages.
60.Cost of distress.
61.Magistrate to determine amount to be levied in case of dispute.
62.Place of trial and jurisdiction.
63.Offences by companies.
CHAPTER XI
MISCELLANEOUS
64.Service of documents.
65.Hoisting unlawful colours in port.
66.Emergency preparedness and response plan.
67.Reporting of incident.
68.Shore based welfare services for seafarers.
69.Port community system and vessel traffic service.
70.Order for securing compliance.
71.Prior clearance.
72.Obligations of ports under international conventions.
73.Notification of mega port.
74.Chairperson, members, officers and employees of Council, etc., to be
public servants.
75.Application of certain laws.
76.Power of Central Government to make rules.
77.Power of State Government to make rules.
78.Power of Central Government to make rules in consultation with State
Governments.
79.Power of Council to make regulations.
80.Power of Council to issue guidelines.
81.Laying of rules and regulations before Parliament and State Legislature.
82.Protection of action taken in good faith.
(iv)
CLAUSES
83.Power to amend Second Schedule.
84.Power to remove difficulties.
85.Repeal and savings.
THE FIRST SCHEDULE.
THE SECOND SCHEDULE.
THE THIRD SCHEDULE.
1
AS INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA
Bill No. 65 of 2025
THE INDIAN PORTS BILL, 2025
A
BILL
to consolidate the law relating to ports, promote integrated port development,
facilitate ease of doing business and ensure the optimum utilisation of India's
coastline; establish and empower State Maritime Boards for effective
management of ports other than major ports; establish the Maritime State
Development Council for fostering structured growth and development of the
port sector; provide for the management of pollution, disaster, emergencies,
security, safety, navigation, and data at ports; ensure compliance with India’s
obligations under international instruments to which it is a party; take
measures for the conservation of ports; provide for adjudicatory mechanisms
for the redressal of port-related disputes; and address matters connected
therewith or incidental thereto.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Seventy-sixth Year of the Republic of India
as follows:—
CHAPTER I
PRELIMINARY
5 1. (1) This Act may be called the Indian Ports Act, 2025. Short title,
commencement
and application.
2
(2) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by
notification in the Official Gazette, appoint; and different dates may be appointed
for different provisions of this Act and any reference in any such provision to the
commencement of this Act shall be construed as a reference to the commencement
of that provision. 5
(3) Save as otherwise provided in this Act, the provisions of this Act,—
(a) shall apply to—
(i) all ports to which the provisions of the Indian Ports Act, 1908 15 of 1908.
applied immediately before the date of commencement of this Act;
(ii) all new ports notified under sub-section (1) of section 11; 10
(iii) any part of the navigable rivers or channels leading to such
ports as may be notified by the appropriate Government in such form
and manner as may be prescribed by the Central Government in
consultation with the State Government;
(iv) all vessels within port limits; and 15
(v) all aircrafts making use of any part of the port, while on water,
as they apply in relation to vessels; and
(b) shall not apply to—
(i) such port or navigable rivers or channels or vessels or class thereof,
as the Central Government may, by notification, specify in this behalf; 20
(ii) any vessel or aircraft making use of any part of the port
belonging to or exclusively servicing, for military or non-commercial
service of the Government, the Indian Navy, Indian Coast Guard,
customs authorities, Central Armed Forces and police and other agencies
as may be notified by the Central Government; 25
(iii) any vessel belonging to or in the service of the Central
Government or the State Government; or
(iv) any foreign vessel of war.
Definitions. 2. (1) In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,—
(a) “appropriate Government” or “Government”, in relation to major 30
ports, means the Central Government; and in relation to ports other than major
ports, means the State Government;
(b) “Authority”, in relation to—
(i) major ports, means—
(A) the Board of Major Port Authority; or 35
(B) the board of directors, in case a port is registered as a
company under the Companies Act, 2013; and 18 of 2013.
(ii) ports other than major ports, means the State Maritime Board
of each State;
(c) “Board of Major Port Authority” means the Board constituted by the 40
Central Government under sub-section (1) of section 3 of the Major Port
Authorities Act, 2021, for each major port; 1 of 2021.
(d) “Chairperson” means the Chairperson of the Council;
3
(e) “coastal waters” means any part of the territorial waters of India, along
with any part of the adjoining maritime zones of India within the meaning of the
Territorial Waters, Continental Shelf, Exclusive Economic Zone and Other
80 of 1976. Maritime Zones Act, 1976, or any other law for the time being in force;
5 (f) “concessionaire” means any person who has been granted any right,
licence, permit or authorisation, by whatever name called, by the Government
or the Authority, including by way of a concession agreement, for conducting
all or any activity within a port;
(g) “conservator” means a person or body of persons appointed for each port
10 or two or more ports by the Government under sub-section (1) of section 18;
(h) “convention” means an international convention to which India is a party;
(i) “Council” means the Maritime State Development Council
established under section 3;
(j) “equipment”, in relation to a vessel, includes boats, tackle,
15 machinery, boilers, cargo handling gear, pumps and any fitting, anchor,
propeller, apparels, furniture, life-saving appliances of every description,
spars, masts, rigging and sails, fog signals, lights, shapes and signals of
distress, medicines and medical and surgical stores and appliances, charts,
radio installations, appliances for preventing, detecting or extinguishing fires,
20 buckets, compasses, axes, lanterns, loading and discharging gears and
appliances of all kinds and all other stores and spares or articles belonging to
or to be used in connection with or necessary for navigation, propulsion,
security, pollution prevention and safety of the vessel;
(k) “existing port” means every port to which the provisions of the Indian
15 of 1908. 25 Ports Act, 1908 applied, immediately before the commencement of this Act;
(l) “Magistrate” means a person exercising powers of the Magistrate
46 of 2023. under the Bharatiya Nagarik Suraksha Sanhita, 2023;
(m) “major port” means any port declared as such by the Central
Government by notification in the Official Gazette, to be a major port;
30 (n) “master”, in relation to any vessel or aircraft making use of any port,
means any person having for the time being the command or charge of the vessel
or the aircraft, not being a pilot or harbour master or conservator of the port;
(o) “mega port” means major port or port other than major port,
classified as a mega port under section 73;
35 (p) “mooring” means a fixed or floating structure or device which is used
for the berthing and unberthing of any vessel or aircraft making use of a port,
including shifting along the quayside, or is required for the safe operation of a
waterborne vessel in the port or in the waterway access to the port;
(q) “new port” means any port, other than an existing port, notified under
40 sub-section (1) of section 11;
(r) “notification” means a notification published in the Official Gazette
and the term “notify” or “notified”, shall be construed accordingly;
(s) “owner”, in relation to––
(i) goods, includes any consignor, consignee, shipper or agent for
45 the sale, custody, loading or unloading of such goods; and
(ii) any vessel or aircraft making use of any port, includes any
registered owner, charterer, consignee or mortgagee in possession
thereof;
4
(t) “pilot” means any person for the time being authorised by the
Government to pilot vessels;
(u) “port” includes any terminal, offshore terminal, shipyard, repair yard,
ship breaking yard, bunkering station, captive jetties or roadstead or port
facility or single buoy mooring which is normally used for the fuelling, 5
re-fuelling, loading, unloading, embarkation or disembarkation of passengers,
warehousing, building or repair or anchoring of vessels, or any other place at
which a vessel can call, and any part of the navigable river or channel to which
this Act extends, but shall not include any ship recycling activities;
(v) “port facility” means any location or area including anchorages or awaiting 10
berths or approaches from seaward as determined by the Central Government, or
such designated authority as the Central Government may, by notification, specify,
where interface between vessels or a vessel and a port takes place;
(w) “port limits” means the defined boundaries of the area of a port
notified under sub-section (1) of section 11; 15
(x) “port officer” means the conservator or harbour master or such other
officers appointed under sub-sections (1) and (2) of section 18;
(y) “port service provider” means a person who carries out all or any of
the port works;
(z) “port tariff” means a scale of rates published under sub-section (2) of 20
section 47 for the fees or other charges leviable under section 46;
(za) “port user” means any person who avails the services of a port
including port works;
(zb) “port works” includes,––
(i) designing, constructing, extending, maintaining, removing or 25
demolishing—
(a) maritime structures and other buildings, structures,
machineries, equipment and enclosures;
(b) railways, roads, bridges and embankments;
(ii) reclaiming land from the sea or a river and dredging; 30
(iii) supplying water, fuel or electricity to the port;
(iv) providing labour to the port;
(v) construction of dry docks, cruise terminal and water transport
terminal;
(vi) construction of port infrastructure; and 35
(vii) any other services as may be notified by the Government;
(zc) “prescribed” means prescribed by rules made by the appropriate
Government or by the Central Government in consultation with the State
Government under this Act;
(zd) “regulations” means regulations made by the Council under this Act; 40
(ze) “Schedule” means a Schedule annexed to this Act;
(zf) “security” means maritime security and includes any measures
undertaken by the owners or operators or persons in charge of the vessels or
management of port facilities, offshore installations and other marine
organisations or establishments, or undertaken by the Central Government, to
45
protect ports or vessels or any person or thing relating directly or indirectly to
maritime navigation,—
5
(i) against terrorism, sabotage, stowaways, illegal migrants,
asylum seekers, piracy, armed robbery, seizure or pilferage; and
(ii) against any other hostile act or influence, which threatens the
security in the maritime transport sector;
5 (zg) “State” means any State or Union territory in India having coastal
location;
(zh) “State Government”, in relation to a Union territory, means the
Administrator thereof;
(zi) “State Maritime Board” means the State Maritime Board referred to
10 in sub-section (1) of section 13;
(zj) “vessel” includes every description of water craft used or capable of
being used in the marine environment, such as ship, boat, sailing vessel,
fishing vessel, submersible, semi-submersible, hydrofoils, non-displacement
crafts, amphibious crafts, wing-in-ground crafts, pleasure crafts, barges,
15 lighters, mobile offshore drilling units, mobile offshore units, or of any other
description whether fitted with mechanical means of propulsion or not.
(2) Words and expressions used and not defined in this Act but defined in the
1 of 2021. Major Port Authorities Act, 2021 or the Merchant Shipping Act, 1958, shall have
44 of 1958. the meanings respectively assigned to them in those Acts.
20 CHAPTER II
MARITIME STATE DEVELOPMENT COUNCIL
3. (1) The Central Government shall, by notification, establish, for the Establishment of
purposes of this Act, a Council to be called the Maritime State Development Council.
Council.
25 (2) The Council shall consist of the following members, ex officio, namely:—
(a) the Union Minister for Ports, Shipping and Waterways who shall be
the Chairperson;
(b) the Minister-in-charge of ports of each State;
(c) the Minister-in-charge of the Union territory of Puducherry and the
30 Administrators of all other coastal Union territories;
(d) the Secretary or equivalent rank to the Government of India in the
Indian Navy dealing with coastal security, to be nominated by the Central
Government in the Ministry of Defence;
(e) the Secretary or equivalent rank to the Government of India in the
35 Indian Coast Guard dealing with coastal security, to be nominated by the
Central Government in the Ministry of Defence;
(f) the Secretary to the Government of India in the Ministry of Ports,
Shipping and Waterways, who shall be the Member Secretary of the Council.
(3) The Chairperson may invite such persons to the meetings of the Council,
40 in such manner and subject to such conditions as may be specified by regulations.
(4) The Council shall transact business at its meetings in such manner as may
be specified by regulations.
(5) No member shall receive any remuneration for the performance of its
functions under this Act.
45 (6) Notwithstanding anything in any other law for the time being in force, the
office of a member of the Council shall not be deemed to be an office of profit.
6
Powers of 4. The Chairperson shall have the powers of general superintendence and
Chairperson. directions in the conduct of the affairs of the Council and shall discharge other
powers and functions of the Council as may be assigned to him under this Act.
Vacancies etc., 5. No act or proceeding of the Council shall be invalid merely by reason of,—
not to invalidate
proceedings of (a) any vacancy in, or any defect in the constitution of, the Council; or 5
Council.
(b) any defect in the appointment of a person acting as a member of the
Council; or
(c) any irregularity in the procedure of the Council not affecting the
merits of the case.
'
10
Functions of 6. (1) The Council shall,—
Council.
(a) make recommendations to the Government on,—
(i) the adequacy of the existing legal framework or statutory
compliances, with a view to provide for a more efficient and conducive
framework for ports in India;
(ii) measures to facilitate growth of the port sector and to promote 15
competition and efficiency in the operation of ports;
(iii) port connectivity and assessing the requirement of other
infrastructure through road, rail, inland waterways transport, pipeline
and conveyor;
(iv) any other matter relating to ports, as the Council may decide; and 20
(v) any other matter as may be referred to it by the Central
Government or the State Government;
(b) discharge the following functions, in consultation with the Central
Government and the State Governments, namely:—
(i) to advise the Central Government on the formulation of the 25
national perspective plan referred to in section 12;
(ii) issue guidelines in respect of the following, namely:—
(A) the data or information to be collected by ports and the
manner of collection, storage, updation and submission of such
30
data or information to the Council;
(B) to provide for the manner in which any information,
records, data and research studies relating to ports, shall be
disseminated, including the grant of public access thereto;
(C) for ensuring transparency of port tariff;
(c) perform such other functions including administrative and financial 35
functions as may be entrusted to it by the Central Government.
(2) While discharging its functions, the Council shall exercise transparency
and take into account the optimum management and utilisation of the available
coastline, appropriate cost of logistics through multi-modality, national
development priorities, sustainability and issues of national security. 40
(3) Where the Council considers it expedient so to do for the purpose of
discharging its functions under sub-section (1), it may, by order in writing, call upon
the Authority, port or any person, at any time to furnish in writing, such information
as the Council may require.
7
7. (1) The Central Government may make available to the Council such Employees of
officers and employees as it considers necessary for the efficient discharge of the Council.
functions of the Council under this Act.
(2) The salary and allowances payable to, and the other conditions of service
5
of the employees of the Council shall be such as may be prescribed by the Central
Government.
8. The Central Government may, after due appropriation made by Parliament Grants by
Central
by law in this behalf, make to the Council grants of such sums of money as are
Government.
' required by it to discharge its functions under this Act.
10 9. The Council may, by general or special order in writing, delegate to any Delegation of
member or employee of the Council, subject to such conditions, if any, as may be powers of
Council.
specified in the order, such of its powers and functions under this Act, except the
power to make regulations or to issue guidelines, as it may deem necessary.
CHAPTER III
15 PORT AND PORT LIMITS
10. No port shall commence or carry on operations therein unless it is,— Port operations.
(a) an existing port; or
(b) a new port notified under sub-section (1) of section 11:
Provided that the Government may, by notification, declare a port or part
20 thereof non-operational in the following cases, namely:—
(i) if such port or part thereof has been non-operational for a continuous
period of ten years; or
(ii) in the interest of national security; or
(iii) for any other reason, as the Government may deem fit.
25 11. (1) The Government may notify a new port and alter the limits of any port: Notification of
new port and
Provided that any notification issued under this sub-section for alteration of alteration of port
port limits shall not have retrospective effect. limits.
(2) The Central Government in consultation with State Government shall
prescribe the norms, form and manner for declaring a new port and for altering the
30 port limits under sub-section (1).
12. (1) The Central Government may formulate a national perspective plan so Adherence to
national
as to meet the requirements of the maritime trade and to prioritise associated
perspective plan
infrastructure development. and guidelines
issued by the
(2) The Central Government, State Governments and the Authority shall Council.
35 endeavor to adhere to the national perspective plan formulated by the Central
Government and the guidelines issued by the Council.
CHAPTER IV
STATE MARITIME BOARDS
13. (1) Every State Maritime Board established or constituted by the State Establishment of
State Maritime
40 Government under the Acts specified in the Third Schedule, shall be deemed to be
Board.
duly established or constituted for the purposes of this Act:
Provided that where the State Maritime Board has not been established or
constituted, the State Government may, by notification, establish a State Maritime
Board within six months from the date of commencement of this Act:
8
Provided further that where the functions of the State Maritime Board are
discharged by a body of persons or a department of the State Government, that
Government may notify such body of persons or department, as the State Maritime
Board for the purposes of this Act.
(2) The State Maritime Board shall be a distinct legal entity, having perpetual 5
succession and a common seal, with power, subject to the provisions of this Act, to
acquire, hold and dispose of property, both movable and immovable, and to contract
and shall, by the said name, sue or be sued.
(3) The head office of the State Maritime Board shall be at such place as the
State Government may, by notification, specify in this behalf. 10
14. (1) On and from the date of establishment or the date of notification of the
Transfer of
assets and State Maritime Board under sub-section (1) of section 13, the State Government
liabilities, etc. shall transfer to the State Maritime Board, and vest, amongst other things,—
(a) all port land, property, assets, funds, interest in property and all rights
to levy rates vested in the State Government; 15
(b) all rates, fees, rents and other sums of money due to the State
Government; and
(c) every employee serving under the State Government before such date
solely or mainly for or in connection with affairs of the port.
(2) All debts, obligations and liabilities incurred, all contracts entered into and 20
all matters and things engaged to be done with or for the State Government till the
date of establishment or the date of notification of the State Maritime Board under
sub-section (1) of section 13, shall be deemed to have been incurred, entered into or
done by, with or for the State Maritime Board, and all suits or other legal
proceedings instituted by or against the State Government till the date of 25
establishment or the date of notification of the State Maritime Board, be continued
or instituted by or against the State Maritime Board.
Functions of 15. (1) Every State Maritime Board shall be responsible for the effective
State Maritime administration, control and management of ports other than major ports within the
Board.
territory of the respective State and for the said purpose, shall perform the following
30
functions, namely:—
(a) initiating plans for development of ports;
(b) promoting the use, development and improvement of ports;
(c) executing such works within or outside the limits of ports and providing
such appliances to ports, as the Board may deem expedient or necessary;
35
(d) exercising licensing functions in respect of infrastructure and
services of ports;
(e) exercising supervision and control over all port works, including port
works contracted out to third parties;
(f) regulating and controlling navigation within the limits and the
40
approaches to the ports;
(g) fixing of port tariff;
(h) developing new ports, subject to obtaining security clearance as per
the guidelines issued by the Central Government;
(i) protecting ecological balance and safeguarding social and 45
environmental issues;
(j) advising or issuing directions in relation to matters referred to the
Board by the State Government;
(k) providing or ensuring the provision of such other services and facilities
which may be considered necessary for the efficient operation of ports;
50
(l) ensuring compliance with the provisions of this Act and the rules
made thereunder;
9
(m) carrying out all other functions that are or may be notified by the
State Government.
(2) The State Maritime Board shall ensure transparency in the exercise of its
powers and discharging of its functions.
5 (3) The State Maritime Board may, for the purposes of discharging its
functions under sub-section (1), issue such directions from time to time, in writing,
to any port or port officer, as it may consider necessary, and such port or port officer
shall comply with such directions.
CHAPTER V
10 ADJUDICATION OF DISPUTES
16. (1) Every State Government shall, by notification, constitute a Dispute Resolution of
Resolution Committee consisting of not less than three members, for the purposes
disputes.
of adjudicating any dispute arising between ports other than major ports,
concessionaires, port users and port service providers within the State, unless the
15 parties have agreed to arbitration or any other dispute resolution mechanism forming
part of the concession agreement, licence, permit or authorisation.
(2) An application for adjudication of any dispute referred to in
sub-section (1) shall be made to the State Maritime Board in such form and manner
as may be prescribed by the State Government and the State Maritime Board shall
20 refer the application to the Dispute Resolution Committee.
(3) The Dispute Resolution Committee shall, after giving the parties an
opportunity of being heard, pass an order in writing within a period of six months
from the date of receipt of the application by it:
Provided that where the Dispute Resolution Committee is unable to dispose
25 of such dispute within the stipulated period of six months, it may extend the period
of disposal upto three months at a time, with reasons to be recorded in writing, but
such period including extended period, shall not exceed twelve months in any case.
(4) The Dispute Resolution Committee shall, for the purposes of discharging
its function under sub-section (1), have the same powers as are vested in a civil court
5 of 1908. 30 under the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908, while trying a suit in respect of the
following matters, namely:—
(a) the discovery and production of books of account and other
documents;
(b) summoning and enforcing the attendance of persons and examining
35 them on oath;
(c) issuing commissions for the examination of witnesses or documents; and
(d) any other matter which may be prescribed by the State Government.
(5) Any party aggrieved by an order of the Dispute Resolution Committee under
sub-section (3), may prefer an appeal to the High Court of the appropriate jurisdiction,
40 within sixty days from the date on which a copy of the order is received by the party.
17. No civil court shall have jurisdiction to entertain any suit or proceeding in Civil court not to
respect of any matter which the Dispute Resolution Committee is empowered by or have
jurisdiction.
under this Act to determine.
CHAPTER VI
45 PORT OFFICERS
18. (1) The Government shall appoint such officers or body of persons to be Appointment of
the conservator for every port, or for two or more ports. conservator,
harbour master
(2) Every port shall appoint a harbour master or such other officers of the port and other port
as may be prescribed by the appropriate Government. officers.
50 (3) The terms and condition of service of the officers appointed under
sub-sections (1) and (2) shall be such as may be prescribed by the appropriate Government.
10
(4) The conservator shall be subject to the control of the Government and the
Authority.
(5) All officers operating in a port shall be subject to the supervision and
control of the conservator.
(6) The conservator may, with the approval of the Government, delegate such 5
of its powers to such persons, as may be prescribed by the appropriate Government.
Powers of
19. (1) Subject to the provisions of this Act, the conservator may, with respect
conservator to to any vessel within the port, issue such directions as may be necessary for carrying
issue directions. out the provisions of this Act or the rules made thereunder.
(2) Without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing power, the conservator 10
may issue directions relating to all or any of the following matters, namely:—
(a) the berthing, mooring or anchoring including the method of
anchoring, of a vessel;
(b) the removal of the vessel from any place within the port to any other
place and the time within which such removal is to be effected;
15
(c) the regulation, restriction or prohibition of movement of vessels in
the port and the approaches to the port;
(d) requiring the master of any vessel to place at his disposal, such
number of crew as may be deemed fit, for the purpose of preventing or
extinguishing fire or for any other matter under this Act; 20
(e) prohibiting any vessel from entering or leaving the port, where such
vessel fails to comply with the provisions of this Act or any other law for the
time being in force or the rules, regulations or directions issued thereunder;
(f) cutting, or causing to be cut, any warp or rope endangering the safety
of any vessel in the port. 25
(3) If any person refuses or neglects to obey any direction of the conservator
under this section, the conservator may cause or cause to be done, all necessary acts
for execution of the directions and may hire and employ suitable persons for this
purpose, and all expenses incurred in this behalf shall be recoverable from the
person for such refusal or neglect. 30
Removal of 20. (1) The conservator may remove, or cause to be removed, either on his
obstructions own or through external agency or through a port officer, any obstruction in any part
within port
of a port, which in his opinion obstructs the operation of a port or part thereof or any
limits.
other work on any part of the shore or bank within the port limits.
(2) The owner of any such obstruction shall be liable to pay the reasonable 35
expenses of the removal thereof.
(3) If the owner of any such obstruction fails to pay the reasonable expenses
incurred in the removal thereof, the conservator may sell the vessels, wreck, material
or any other thing forming the obstruction in public auction and recover expenses
incurred for such removal from the proceeds of the sale, and shall pay the surplus 40
of such proceeds, or deliver the unsold parts of the obstruction, to the person entitled
to receive the same and if no such person is available, the conservator shall cause
the same to be kept and deposited in such manner as the Government directs.
(4) The conservator may, if necessary, from time to time, realise the expenses
of keeping the obstruction, together with the expenses of sale, by a further sale of 45
such part of the obstruction as may remain unsold.
(5) If the obstruction exists on account of any permit, grant, licence or other
lawful instrument issued by the Government, then the conservator shall report the
same to the Government, and, with the previous sanction of the Government, cause
the same to be removed or altered in such manner, making reasonable compensation 50
to the owner of such obstruction, to be determined on the basis of such factors, as
may be prescribed by the appropriate Government.
11
Explanation.— For the purposes of this section, the term “obstruction”
includes any structure or a vessel or wreck or part thereof, or any material such as
cargo, bunker or pollutant or such other thing or any public nuisance, impeding or
likely to impede the operation of the port.
5 21. The Government may, by notification, specify restrictions on certain activities Power to specify
within port limits which may cause any impediment to the navigation in a port. restrictions on
activities within
port limits.
22. (1) If any vessel hooks or gets foul of any of the buoys or moorings laid Fouling of
'
down by the conservator in a port, the master of such vessel or any other person moorings.
shall not, except in case of emergency, lift the buoys or moorings for the purpose of
10 unhooking or getting clear from the same without the assistance of the conservator.
(2) The conservator, immediately on receiving notice of any emergency, under
sub-section (1), shall assist and superintend the clearing of such vessel and the
master of such vessel shall, upon demand, pay such reasonable expenses as may be
incurred in clearing the same.
15 23. (1) The conservator, or any person appointed under this Act to receive fees Power to board
or charges related to any vessel, may, when necessary for the performance of duties vessels and enter
under this Act, board any vessel or enter any building or place within the port limits,
buildings.
either alone or accompanied by any other person or body of persons.
(2) No master of a vessel or any person in possession or occupation of the
20 building or place shall without lawful excuse refuse the conservator or any person
or body of persons to board or enter such vessel, building or place.
24. (1) The Government may appoint an empanelled medical practitioner as Appointment
the health officer to carry out the functions of the health officer at any port.
and powers of
health officer
(2) The health officer shall possess such qualification, experience and be
and prevention
of contagious
25 subject to such other terms and conditions of service as may be prescribed by the diseases.
appropriate Government.
(3) The health officer shall, subject to the control of the Government, have the
following powers, within the port limits, namely:—
(a) to inspect the provisions, water, sanitation and accommodation
30 within vessels;
(b) to enter or board any vessel and medically examine all or any of the
seafarers on board the vessel;
(c) to require and enforce the production of the log-book and any other
books, papers or documents as may be deemed necessary for the purpose of
35 enquiring into the health and medical condition of persons on board the vessel;
(d) to summon and question any person for any purpose, to require
responses from the person questioned, and to make and sign a declaration
affirming the truth of the statements made by such person.
(4) Whenever any infectious or contagious disease has broken out or is reasonably
suspected to break out at any port or part thereof, the appropriate Government may—
40
(a) declare such port or part thereof as an infected zone, and require all
persons coming out from an infected zone to be medically inspected or
examined by a health officer; and
(b) prescribe the measures to be taken at such infected zone.
45 (5) Whenever any infectious or contagious disease has broken out or is
reasonably suspected to break out in vessels arriving at, or being in, any port,—
12
(a) the conservator shall take such action, and pass such directions to
such persons for the prevention or containment of the spread of any infectious
or contagious disease, as may be prescribed by the Central Government in
consultation with the State Government;
(b) the master shall report the particulars of any such disease to the 5
Government or the conservator in such manner as may be prescribed by the
Central Government in consultation with the State Government.
(6) The health officer, along with such person or body of persons authorised
by the Government, may board the vessel for medical inspection of vessels and of '
persons on board the vessels. 10
Indemnity of 25. The Government shall not be liable for any act or default of any
Government conservator, harbour master or other port officers or of any deputy or assistant of
against act or
any of the authorities aforesaid or of any person acting under the control or direction
default of port
officers or pilot. of any such authority, deputy or assistant, or for any act or default of any pilot or for
any damage sustained by any vessel in consequence of any defect in any of the 15
moorings, hawsers or other things belonging to the Government which may be used
by the vessel:
Provided that nothing in this section shall protect the Government from a suit
in respect of any act done by or under the express order or sanction of the
Government. 20
CHAPTER VII
SAFETY AND CONSERVATION OF PORTS
Damage to 26. (1) No person shall, without lawful excuse, remove, destroy or damage
property of port. any property including any pier or wharf belonging to, or in the custody or
possession of, the port, or hinder or prevent such property from being used or 25
operated in the manner it is intended to be used or operated.
(2) Any person who does any act in violation of the provisions of sub-section (1),
shall, in addition to any other penalty specified under column (4) of the Second
Schedule, be liable to pay such expenses, as the conservator may determine to be just
and reasonable, on the basis of such factors, as may be prescribed by the appropriate 30
Government for any loss, destruction or damage suffered by the port, including the
expenses of any inspection or survey carried out, having regard to the circumstances of
the case.
Warping.
27. Every master of a vessel in any port shall, when directed by the
conservator, permit warps or hawsers to be made fast to the vessel for the purpose 35
of warping any other vessel in the port, and shall not allow any such warp or hawser
to be let go until so directed by the conservator.
Master to take 28. Every master of a vessel lying in any port shall take order to extinguish
order to any fire on the vessel, and co-operate with the conservator or any person acting
extinguish fire.
under the authority of the conservator, in extinguishing or attempting to extinguish 40
any fire on the vessel.
Offences in 29. (1) No person shall wilfully and without lawful excuse,—
connection with
safety of vessels, (a) loosen or remove from its moorings or from its fastenings any vessel in
etc. the port without leave or authority from the master or owner of such vessel; or
(b) lift, injure, make a vessel fast to, loosen or set adrift any moorings,
45
buoys, beacons or sea or landmarks; or
(c) discharge any firearm in the port; or
(d) do or omit to do any act on board any vessel in the port which has
caused or likely to cause fire; or
13
(e) use a vessel in the port which is in such a state that by reason of the
defective condition of its hull, equipment or machinery, or by reason of
under-manning or otherwise, the life of any person or the safety of any other
vessel navigating in the port is likely to be endangered.
5 (2) No master of a vessel shall cause or suffer any warp or hawser attached to
his vessel to be left out in any port in such a manner as to endanger the safety of any
other vessel navigating in the port.
(3) No person shall grave, bream or smoke any vessel in the port, or boil or
heat any pitch, tar, resin, dammar, turpentine oil or other such combustible matter
10 on board any vessel within port limits, if such act is prohibited by the Government,
or contrary to the orders or directions of the conservator.
30. No person, without the permission of the conservator shall, in any port, Unauthorised
person not to
creep or sweep for anchors, cables or other stores lost or supposed to be lost therein.
search for lost
stores.
31. No person shall, except with the permission of the conservator and under the Injuring banks or
15 supervision of such person as may be appointed by the conservator, in any port,— shores of port
prohibited.
(a) disturb the existing waterbed or geophysical structures or any
artificial protection or constructions or shore of the port; or
(b) sink or bury in any part of such bank or shore, whether the same is
public or private property, any mooring-post, anchor or any other thing; or
20 (c) do any other thing which is likely to cause damage to such bank or shore.
32. (1) No vessel shall enter, leave or be moved in any port without having a Moving of
pilot, harbour master or any port officer on board, unless,— vessels without
pilot or
(a) upon application to the proper officer the master was unable to permission of
procure a pilot, harbour master or port officer to go on board the vessel;
harbour master
or port officer.
25 (b) an authority in writing has been obtained from the conservator or any
officer authorised to give such authority:
Provided that the Government may, by notification, direct that in any port as
may be specified therein, the provisions of this sub-section shall not apply to sailing
vessels of any measurement not exceeding a measurement so specified therein.
30 (2) Notwithstanding anything in sub-section (1), the owner or master of a
vessel, shall be answerable for any loss or damage caused by the vessel or by any
fault of the navigation of the vessel.
33. A port officer shall, if required by an officer authorised by a general or Port officer to
special order of the Central Government, cooperate as directed by the officer, in co-operate in
manoeuvres for
35 carrying out manoeuvres related to the defense of the port in time of war, or for the defence of port.
security of the port against sub-conventional or non-traditional threats, or natural
disasters, and, if necessary, temporarily make available the services of their staff,
vessels, property, equipment or other resources:
Provided that the Central Government shall bear the running expenses of
40 vessels placed at the disposal of such officer in respect of the period during which
they are so at his disposal, and be responsible for any damage thereto.
Explanation.— For the purposes of this section, the expression “running
expenses” shall include all expenses incurred in connection with the use of the
vessels other than any charges for their hire or for the wages of the officers and
crews of such vessels.
45
34. (1) The Authority may issue guidelines for the purposes of regulating the Authority and
Director-General
following matters and activities, namely:—
to regulate
certain activities.
14
(a) the vessel movement and safety of navigation, including determining
the schedules and procedural protocols for vessel entry, departure, and transit
within port limits;
(b) assigning the berths, including designating specific berths, stations,
and areas for vessel docking in the port; 5
(c) the anchor and equipment management, focusing on the correct
stowage and positioning of cargo gear, anchors, and other external apparatus
on vessels;
(d) the cargo and passenger operations, including regulating locations
and methods for passenger embarkation and loading and unloading of cargo; '10
(e) standards for bunkering practices and equipment for vessel fueling
operations;
(f) specifying the requirements for the clear passage to ensure designated
safe passage areas are maintained near docking structures and within port limits;
(g) standards and procedure for mooring and anchoring of vessels and 15
related equipment;
(h) specifying the access and usage protocols for Government-owned
docking and storage facilities;
(i) standards and procedures for licensing various maritime transport
vessels and the conditions for license renewal or revocation; 20
(j) specifying protocols for the consistent and safe use of visual and
signal aids by vessels and ports;
(k) standards relating to occupational health, safety and security of dock
workers, seafarers and port visitors; and
(l) the protocols to ensure seafarer and port workers' welfare-related 25
resources and activities.
(2) The Director-General may also issue such guidelines on any of the matters and
activities specified in sub-section (1), as may be deemed necessary, from time to time.
(3) Any guidelines issued by the Authority under sub-section (1), shall be in
conformity with the guidelines issued by the Director-General under sub-section (2). 30
Explanation.— For the purposes of this section, “Director-General” means the
Director-General appointed under the Merchant Shipping Act, 1958. 44 of 1958.
CHAPTER VIII
PREVENTION, CONTAINMENT OF POLLUTION AND RESPONSE
Definitions. 35. In this Chapter, unless the context otherwise requires,— 35
(a) “Ballast Water Management Convention” means the International
Convention for the Control and Management of Ships’ Ballast Water and
Sediments, 2004;
(b) “cargo residues” means the remnants of any cargo material on board
which remain on the deck or in holds or tanks following loading and unloading, 40
including loading and unloading excess or spillage, whether in wet or dry
condition or entrained in wash-water, but does not include cargo dust remaining
on the deck after sweeping or dust of the external surfaces of the vessel;
(c) “MARPOL Convention” means the International Convention for the
Prevention of Pollution from Ships, 1973, including its Protocol of 1978; 45
(d) “reception facility” means any facility which is fixed, floating or
mobile and capable of providing the service of receiving the waste from
vessels;
15
(e) “waste from vessels” or “vessel-generated waste” means every
waste, including cargo residues, which is generated during the service of a
vessel or during loading, unloading and cleaning operations and which falls
within the scope of Annexes I, II, IV, V and VI to the MARPOL Convention
5 and the Ballast Water Management Convention.
36. Every port shall provide reception facilities adequate to meet the needs of Reception
vessels without causing undue delay to vessels, in compliance with the provisions facilities.
relating to reception facilities specified in Annexes I, II, IV, V and VI of the
MARPOL Convention or with the requirements of Article 5 of the Ballast Water
10 Management Convention, as applicable, based on such conditions as may be
prescribed by the Central Government in consultation with the State Government.
Explanation.— For the purposes of this section, the term “adequate” means
capable of receiving the types and quantities of wastes from vessels normally using
that port, taking into account the operational needs of the port users, its size and
15 geographical location and the types of vessels calling at that port.
37. Where in respect of any port it appears to the Central Government, on the Direction to
basis of the audit conducted under section 42 or otherwise, that the port has no provide adequate
reception
reception facilities or if the port has such facilities, those facilities are not adequate
facilities.
within the meaning of section 36, the Central Government or an officer authorised
20 by it may, by order in writing, direct the port to provide, or arrange for the provision
of, such reception facilities as may be specified in that order.
38. (1) Every port shall prepare a port waste reception and handling plan in Port waste
such form and manner as may be prescribed by the Central Government in reception and
handling plans.
consultation with the State Government.
25 (2) Upon approval of the port waste reception and handling plan by the Central
Government, such plan shall be implemented by the port.
(3) Every port shall communicate such information about the port waste
reception and handling plan to vessels in such manner as may be prescribed by the
Central Government in consultation with the State Government.
30 39. The operator, agent or master of a vessel bound for India shall submit an Advance waste
advance waste notice to the port of call in such form and manner and within such notice.
time period as may be prescribed by the Central Government in consultation with
the State Government.
40. (1) Subject to such conditions as may be prescribed by the Central Delivery of
35 Government in consultation with the State Government, the master of a vessel vessel-generated
waste.
calling at a port shall, before leaving that port, deliver all its vessel-generated waste
carried on board to a reception facility.
(2) Upon delivery, the port where the waste was delivered shall issue the waste
delivery receipt to the master of the vessel in such form and manner as may be
40 prescribed by the Central Government in consultation with the State Government.
41. (1) A port providing reception facilities or a person providing such Charges for
facilities by arrangement with the port may levy such charges for the use of the vessel-generated
waste.
facilities.
(2) The reception facility provided at the port shall be made available for use
by any vessel subject to such conditions as may be imposed by the port and on
45
payment of the charges referred to in sub-section (1).
42. (1) The Central Government shall audit every port at such intervals and in Audit of ports.
such manner as may be prescribed by the Central Government in consultation with
the State Government.
16
(2) The audit under sub-section (1) shall be carried out for the proposes of
checking the availability and adequacy of reception facilities in accordance with this
Chapter and the rules made thereunder, and shall include audit of such pollution
containment equipment as may be specified by the Central Government, from time
to time. 5
Maintenance of 43. The following information shall be uploaded electronically in such manner
information on and by such persons as may be notified by the Central Government, namely:—
portal.
(a) advance waste notice under section 39;
(b) waste delivery receipt under sub-section (2) of section 40;
'
(c) request by a vessel for availing reception facilities; and 10
(d) such other matters as may be notified by the Central Government.
Measures for 44. (1) Every port shall report the particulars of any incident that threatens or
p
co
re
n
v
ta
e
i
n
n
t
m
io
e
n
n
o
t
r
o f
is likely to pose a threat of pollution to the coastal waters or related interests, to the
Government, in such manner as may be prescribed by the Central Government in
pollution.
consultation with the State Government. 15
(2) Where the Central Government is satisfied that an incident which threatens
or is likely to pose a threat of pollution to the coastal waters or related interests has
taken place or is likely to take place, it may direct the port or State Government or
the Authority or organisation, as may be applicable, to take such action for the
prevention or containment or threat of such pollution in accordance with the 20
applicable law.
Explanation.— For the purposes of this section, the expression “coastal
waters” shall mean and include any part of the territorial waters of India, along with
any part of the adjoining maritime zones of India or any marine area adjacent thereto
over which India has, or, may hereafter have, exclusive jurisdiction in regard to 25
control of marine pollution under the Territorial Waters, Continental Shelf,
Exclusive Economic Zone and Other Maritime Zones Act, 1976, or any other law 80 of 1976.
for time being in force.
Directions for 45. The Government may issue directions to any port or port officer to comply
securing
with any of the provisions of this Chapter. 30
compliance.
CHAPTER IX
LEVY OF FEES AND OTHER CHARGES
Levy of fees and 46. There shall be leviable such fees or other charges in each of the ports in
other charges. respect of—
(a) consideration payable to the port by owners or agents of vessels or 35
shippers in lieu of services rendered by such port including but not limited to—
(i) providing usage of or access to all or any part of the port;
(ii) loading or unloading of cargo;
(iii) embarking or disembarking of passengers;
40
(iv) storage of materials;
(v) supplying provisions or equipment to vessels;
(vi) handling, storing and transporting goods on land adjoining
ports and for the handling of passengers carried by the vessels;
(vii) embarking or disembarking of masters, crew and other
personnel, if payable; 45
(viii) repairing of vessel;
17
(ix) providing aids to navigation within the port limits;
(x) carrying passengers or goods between vessels in the port or port
approaches;
(xi) stevedoring, landing and shipping of passengers or goods from
5 or to such vessels;
(xii) wharfage, storage or demurrage of goods on any such place;
(xiii) pilotage and berth hire;
(xiv) towage; and
(xv) waterfront royalty;
'
(b) consideration payable by or to the port for port works pertaining to
10
the maintenance of ports;
(c) realisations from usage of land and property belonging to, or in the
possession or occupation of, the Authority.
47. (1) (a) The port tariff for every major port shall be fixed by— Port tariff.
15 (i) the Board of Major Port Authority or such person or body of persons
authorised by it; or
(ii) the board of directors, in case a port is registered as a company under
18 of 2013. the Companies Act, 2013;
(b) the port tariff for every port other than major port shall be fixed by the
20 respective State Maritime Boards or such concessionaire as may be authorised by
the concerned State Maritime Board.
(2) The port tariff fixed under sub-section (1) shall be published electronically
by the Authority or concessionaire or person or body of persons, responsible for
fixing the port tariff.
25 (3) The port tariff fixed under sub-section (1) shall come into effect after
expiry of a period of thirty days from the date of its publication.
(4) The Council may issue guidelines on any matter relating to transparency
of port tariff including the components thereof.
(5) The Authority may, based on any recommendation by the Government, in
special cases exempt or, remit the whole or any portion of the fees or other charges
30
due or payable under this Act.
48. (1) The Government shall, by notification, authorise at any port, an officer Receipt of fees
or body of persons who may receive the fees or other charges payable under this or other charges.
Act and to expend the receipts thereof, subject to such conditions as may be
35 specified in the notification.
(2) The officer or body of persons authorised to receive fees or other charges,
shall issue a receipt in lieu of such fees or other charges, in such form and manner
as may be prescribed by the appropriate Government, containing the following
particulars, namely:—
40 (a) name of the issuing office;
(b) the port or place at which the fees or other charges due or payable is paid;
and
(c) the name, gross tonnage and other proper description of the vessel in
respect of which the payment is made, as applicable.
18
Owner, agent or 49. The owner, agent or master of every vessel liable to pay any other fees or
master to report
other charges shall, on arrival of such vessel within the port limits, report her arrival
arrival.
to the conservator in such form, manner and within such time as may be prescribed
by the Central Government in consultation with the State Government.
Detention and 50. (1) If the master of any vessel in respect of which any fees or other charges 5
sale on refusal to are payable under this Act refuses or fails to pay the same on demand, the officer or
pay fees or other body of persons authorised under sub-section (1) of section 48 may detain or arrest
charges.
the vessel or any part thereof, until the amount due is paid.
(2) In case any part of the fees or other charges, or of the costs of the detention or
arrest or of the keeping of the vessel detained or arrested remains unpaid for fifteen days 10
after any such detention or arrest, such officer or body of persons may cause the vessel
detained or arrested to be sold, and with the proceeds of such sale, may recover the fees
or other charges and the cost including the costs of sale remaining unpaid, and shall
render the surplus, if any, to the master of the vessel upon demand:
Provided that where such vessel is already arrested under the order of a court 15
or other authority, the authority appointed to receive fees or other charges, may sell
the vessel or part thereof only with the prior permission of such court or other
authority and recover the fees or other charges due and the costs including costs of
sale remaining unpaid, and disburse the surplus, if any, in accordance with the orders
or directions of such court or other authority. 20
(3) Where the sale proceeds of the vessel is insufficient to satisfy the fees or
other charges due and the cost including the costs of sale remains unpaid, the
authority appointed to receive such fees or other charges due may, by order in
writing direct the owner of the vessel to pay the unpaid balance, within one month
of issuance of such order. 25
Grant of 51. No port-clearance shall be granted to any vessel until the owner or master
port-clearance.
or agent or port user has paid or secured to the satisfaction of the officer granting
the clearance the amount of all fees or charges, and of all fines, penalties and
expenses to which the vessel or her owner or master is liable under this Act.
Master not to 52. (1) No master of a vessel shall evade the payment of any fees or other
30
evade payment charges required to be paid under this Act.
of fees or other
charges. (2) In any proceeding before a Magistrate, any document issued by the officer
empowered to grant port clearance under section 51 stating that the master has
evaded such payment shall be sufficient proof of the evasion, unless the master
shows to the satisfaction of the Magistrate that the departure of the vessel without 35
payment of the sum was caused by stress of weather, or that there was lawful or
reasonable ground for such departure.
(3) Any Magistrate having jurisdiction under this Act in any port to which the
vessel may proceed, or in which she may be found, shall be deemed to have
jurisdiction in any proceeding under this section. 40
CHAPTER X
PENALTIES AND PROCEDURES
Offences and 53. (1) Whoever contravenes any provision of this Act or fails to comply with
penalties.
any provision thereof, shall be liable to penalty under this Act and, if, in respect of
any offence or contravention no punishment or penalty is specially provided, shall 45
be liable to penalty which may extend to ten thousand rupees, and if the breach is a
continuing one, with further penalty which may extend to one thousand rupees for
every day, after the first day, during which the breach continues.
(2) The offences mentioned in column (2) of the First Schedule, shall be
punishable to the extent of punishment mentioned in the corresponding column (4) 50
of that Schedule against the offence specified in column (2) of that Schedule.
19
Explanation.— For the purposes of this sub-section, where any offence is
attributable to a port under column (2) of the First Schedule, the fine specified for
such offence under column (4) thereof, shall be payable by the Authority; or by the
concessionaire where such port is operated by the conservator.
5 (3) Whoever contravenes any provision mentioned in column (2) of the
Second Schedule, shall be liable to the extent of penalty mentioned in the
corresponding column (4) of that Schedule against the contravention specified in
column (2) of that Schedule.
' 54. (1) The authority for imposing the penalty under the Second Schedule shall Authority for
10 be the conservator. imposition of
penalty and
(2) For the purposes of imposition of penalty under this Chapter, where the procedure
conservator is a body of persons, the authority for imposition of penalty shall mean,
therefor.
one person appointed from amongst such body of persons, in such manner as may
be prescribed by the appropriate Government.
15 (3) The conservator shall, before imposing any penalty specified under the
Second Schedule, give the parties an opportunity of being heard.
(4) Every order of imposition of penalty under this section shall be in writing.
(5) Any contravention of the provisions of this Act for which penalty has been
provided may be compounded for the first contravention by such officer as may be
20 notified by the Central Government in this behalf.
55. No Court inferior to that of a Judicial Magistrate of the first class shall take Cognizance of
cognizance of any offence specified under the First Schedule. offences.
56. Any person who wilfully fails to comply with any order of the Dispute Penalty for
Resolution Committee against which no appeal has been preferred, shall be liable wilful failure to
comply with
25 to a penalty which may extend to one lakh rupees, and in addition, penalty which
orders of
may extend to one thousand rupees for every day during which such default Dispute
continues. Resolution
Committee.
57. No person shall,— Penalty for
failure to furnish
(a) make any statement or furnish any document which the person knows information, etc.
30 or has reason to believe to be false in any material particular; or
(b) omit to state any material fact knowing it to be material; or
(c) wilfully alter, suppress or destroy any document which is required to
be furnished.
58. Any fine imposed by the Magistrate under the First Schedule, or, penalty Recovery of fine
35 imposed by the conservator under the Second Schedule, may be recovered by or penalty.
distress and sale of the vessel or part thereof, as may be deemed necessary.
59. (1) Any dispute as to the sum to be paid as expenses or damages under this Recovery of
expenses and
Act shall be determined by a Magistrate upon an application made for that purpose
damages.
by either of the disputing parties.
40
(2) Any sum payable as expenses or damages under this Act which does not
exceed twenty thousand rupees may be recovered by the conservator or the
Magistrate, as if it were a penalty or fine.
60. Whenever any penalty, fine, expenses or damages is or are levied under Cost of distress.
this Act by distress and sale, the cost of distress and sale may be levied in addition
45 to such penalty, fine, expenses or damages, in the manner specified in section 59.
20
Magistrate to 61. If any dispute arises concerning the amount leviable by any distress or
determine
arrest under this Act or the costs payable under section 60, the person making the
amount to be
distress or arrest may detain the goods seized or arrested, or the proceeds of the sale
levied in case of
dispute. thereof, until the amount to be levied has been determined by a Magistrate who,
upon an application made for that purpose, may determine the amount and award 5
such costs to be paid by either of the parties to the other of them as the Magistrate
may deem reasonable and payment of such costs if not paid on demand, shall be
enforced as if they were a fine.
Place of trial and 62. (1) Any person committing any offence under this Act may be tried for
jurisdiction. such offence in any place in which that person may be found, or before any 10
Magistrate having jurisdiction over any district or place adjoining the port in which
the offence takes place, or in any court in which that person may be tried under any
other law for time being in force.
(2) The Magistrate referred to in sub-section (1) may exercise all the powers
of a Magistrate under this Act in the same manner and to the same extent as if the
15
offence had been committed locally within the limits of his jurisdiction,
notwithstanding that the offence may not have been committed locally within such
limits and in case any such Magistrate exercises the jurisdiction hereby vested in
him, the offence shall be deemed, for all purposes, to have been committed locally
within the limits of his jurisdiction. 20
Offences by 63. (1) Where any offence under this Act has been committed by a company,
companies. every person who, at the time the offence was committed, was directly in charge of,
and was responsible to, the company for the conduct of the business of the company,
as well as the company, shall be deemed to be guilty of the offence and shall be
liable to be proceeded against and punished accordingly: 25
Provided that nothing in this sub-section shall render any such person liable to
any punishment provided in this Act, if he proves that the offence was committed
without his knowledge or that he exercised all due diligence to prevent the
commission of such offence.
(2) Notwithstanding anything in sub-section (1), where an offence under this 30
Act has been committed by a company and it is proved that the offence has been
committed with the consent or connivance of, or is attributable to any neglect on the
part of, any director, manager, secretary or other officer of the company, such
director, manager, secretary or other officer shall also be deemed to be guilty of that
offence and shall be liable to be proceeded against and punished accordingly. 35
Explanation.— For the purpose of this section, —
(a) “company” means anybody corporate and includes a co-operative
society, a firm, a limited liability partnership registered under the Limited
Liability Partnership Act, 2008 or other association of individuals; and
6 of 2009.
(b) “director”, in relation to a firm, means a partner in the firm. 40
CHAPTER XI
MISCELLANEOUS
Service of 64. (1) Where, for the purposes of this Act any document is to be served on
documents. any person, that document may be served in any case by delivering a copy thereof
personally to the person to be served or by leaving the same at his last place of 45
residence, or by post.
(2) If the document is to be served—
(a) on the harbour master of a port, where there is one, by leaving the
same for him at the port, with the person being or appearing to be in command
of the port; 50
21
(b) on the master of a vessel, where there is one, by leaving the same for
him on board that vessel, with the person being or appearing to be in command
or charge of the vessel; and
(c) on the master of a vessel, or if there is no master and the vessel is in
India, on the owner of the vessel, or, if such owner is not in India, on any agent
5
of the owner residing in India, or, where no such agent is known or can be
found, by affixing a copy thereof on the vessel or at a suitable place on the
bridge.
65. (1) In any port where hoisting is mandated by the conservator, no vessel shall Hoisting
unlawful colours
10 hoist, carry or wear, any flag, jack, pennant or colours, the use whereof is unlawful.
in port.
(2) Every foreign vessel calling at a port in India shall hoist the flag of the flag
State of the vessel and the flag of the Republic of India.
66. (1) Every port shall frame an emergency preparedness and response plan Emergency
for the purposes of safety, security, disaster management and pollution incidents in preparedness
and response
15 accordance with applicable law. plan.
(2) The plan referred to in sub-section (1) shall be submitted to the Central
Government for its approval in such manner as may be directed by the Central
Government in consultation with the State Government.
(3) The Central Government may grant approval to the plan after taking into
consideration such factors as may be notified by the Central Government in
20
consultation with the State Government.
(4) The conservator may issue directions for the implementation of the
approved plan and the Central Government may audit such implementation.
(5) The Central Government may, either suo motu or on the basis of an audit
25 under sub-section (4), issue directions to any person in order to ensure compliance
with the provisions of this section and put in place a national emergency response
mechanism.
67. Every port shall report the particulars of any incident such as property Reporting of
damage, vessels sinking, vessel collisions or fire, in such manner as may be incident.
30 prescribed by the Central Government in consultation with the State Government.
68. Every port shall provide such shore based welfare services as may be Shore based
prescribed by the Central Government in consultation with the State Government,
welfare services
for seafarers.
for seafarers of vessels calling at the port.
69. (1) The Central Government may, by notification, direct a port to adopt a Port community
system and
35 mechanism for electronically integrating such port related data as may be notified
vessel traffic
by the Central Government in consultation with the State Government, with the port service.
community system or any other centralised system.
(2) Every port shall maintain vessel traffic service within the port limits in
accordance with applicable law.
40 Explanation.— For the purposes of this section, the expressions,—
(a) “port community system” means a secure electronic system
integrating the trade related information submitted and exchanged therein,
serving as a centralised portal for ports and other relevant stakeholders in
accordance with the Convention on Facilitation of International Maritime
45 Traffic, 1965 or any other requirement as may be directed by the Central
Government;
(b) “vessel traffic service” shall have the same meaning as assigned to it
20 of 2021. in the Marine Aids to Navigation Act, 2021.
22
Order for 70. The Central Government may issue directions to such port, port facility,
securing
port officer, or person, to ensure compliance with any other laws for the time being
compliance.
in force and the provisions of the Merchant Shipping Act, 1958 relating to the safety 44 of 1958.
and security of port facilities.
Prior clearance. 71. Any port undergoing a change in substantial ownership or effective control 5
shall obtain a prior clearance from the Central Government or a person authorised
by it, in such form and manner and within such time as may be notified by the
Central Government in consultation with the State Government.
Obligations of 72. (1) Every port shall ensure that the obligations under the international
ports under conventions to which India is a party are discharged in accordance with such 10
international
conventions.
conventions.
(2) The obligations to be discharged by the ports under the conventions
referred to in sub-section (1) shall be such as may be prescribed by the Central
Government.
Notification of 73. (1) The Central Government may, in consultation with the State Government, 15
mega port
by notification, specify the criteria for classification of a port as mega port.
(2) The Central Government may notify any major port, which satisfies the
criteria notified under sub-section (1), as a mega port.
(3) The Central Government may, in consultation with the State Government,
notify any port other than major port, which satisfies the criteria notified under 2 0
sub-section (1), as a mega port.
(4) Notwithstanding its classification as a mega port under this section, a port shall
retain its status as either a major port or a port other than a major port, as applicable, and
shall continue to be governed by the respective laws applicable to such port.
Chairperson, 74. All members, officers and other employees of the Council shall be deemed, 25
members, when acting or purporting to act in pursuance of any of the provisions of this Act,
officers and
to be public servants within the meaning of clause (28) of section 2 of the Bharatiya
employees of
Council, etc., to Nyaya Sanhita, 2023. 45 of 2023.
be public
servants.
Application of 75. The provisions of this Act shall be in addition to and not in derogation of,
certain laws. the Major Port Authorities Act, 2021 and the Merchant Shipping Act, 1958, in so 30 1 of 2021.
far as they relate to ports. 44 of 1958.
Power of Central 76. (1) The Central Government may, by notification and subject to the
Government to condition of previous publication, make rules to carry out the provisions of this Act.
make rules.
(2) In particular, and without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing
power, such rules may provide for all or any of the following matters, namely:— 35
(a) the salary and allowances and other conditions of service of the
employees of the Council under sub-section (2) of section 7;
(b) other officers of the port to be appointed under sub-section (2) of
section 18;
(c) the terms and conditions of service of the officers under 4 0
sub-section (3) of section 18;
(d) the powers to be delegated by the conservator and the persons to
whom such powers may be delegated under sub-section (6) of section 18;
(e) the manner of removal or alteration of obstruction and factors for
determining compensation under sub-section (5) of section 20; 45
(f) the qualifications, experience and other terms and conditions of service
of the health officer to be appointed under sub-section (2) of section 24;
23
(g) the measures to be taken at infected zone under clause (b) of
sub-section (4) of section 24;
(h) the factors to be considered by the conservator in determining the
expenses to be paid under sub-section (2) of section 26;
5 (i) the form and manner of receipt of fees or other charges under
sub-section (2) of section 48;
(j) the manner of appointment of conservator from a body of persons
under sub-section (2) of section 54;
(k) the obligations to be discharged by the ports under sub-section (2) of
10 section 72.
77. (1) The State Government may, by notification in the State Gazette and Power of State
subject to the condition of previous publication, make rules to carry out the Government to
make rules.
provisions of this Act.
(2) In particular, and without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing
15 power, such rules may provide for all or any of the following matters, namely:—
(a) the form and manner of making an application for adjudication of
disputes referred to the State Maritime Board under sub-section (2) of section 16;
(b) other matters in respect of which the State Maritime Board shall exercise
powers of civil court under clause (d) of sub-section (4) of section 16;
20
(c) other officers of the port to be appointed under sub-section (2) of
section 18;
(d) the terms and conditions of service of officers under sub-section (3)
of section 18;
(e) the powers to be delegated by the conservator and the persons to
25 whom such powers may be delegated under sub-section (6) of section 18;
(f) the manner of removal or alteration of obstruction and factors for
determining compensation under sub-section (5) of section 20;
(g) the qualification, experience and other terms and conditions of service
of the health officer to be appointed under sub-section (2) of section 24;
30
(h) the measures to be taken at infected zone under clause (b) of
sub-section (4) of section 24;
(i) the factors to be considered by the conservator in determining the
expenses to be paid under sub-section (2) of section 26;
(j) the form and manner of receipt of fees or other charges under
35 sub-section (2) of section 48;
(k) the manner of appointment of conservator from a body of persons
under sub-section (2) of section 54.
78. (1) The Central Government in consultation with the State Governments
may, by notification, and subject to the condition of previous publication, make Power of Central
40 rules to carry out the provisions of this Act. Government to
make rules in
(2) In particular, and without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing consultation
power, such rules may provide for all or any of the following matters, namely:—
with State
Governments.
(a) the form and the manner of notification of any part of the navigable
rivers or channels leading to ports under sub-clause (iii) of clause (a) of
45 sub-section (3) of section 1;
24
(b) the norms, form and manner of notifying a new port and
altering port limits under sub-section (2) of section 11;
(c) the action to be taken by the conservator and the directions to
be issued to the persons under clause (a) of sub-section (5) of section 24;
(d) the manner of reporting of disease by the master under 5
clause (b) of sub-section (5) of section 24;
(e) the conditions subject to which port shall provide reception
facilities under section 36;
(f) the form and manner of preparing port waste reception and
handling plan under sub-section (1) of section 38; 10
(g) the information about the port waste reception and handling plan
and manner of communicating such information under sub-section (3) of
section 38;
(h) the form, manner and time for submitting an advance waste
notice under section 39; 15
(i) the conditions for delivery of vessel-generated waste under
sub-section (1) of section 40;
(j) the form and manner of issuance of waste delivery receipt under
sub-section (2) of section 40;
(k) the intervals and manner of conducting audit of ports under 20
sub-section (1) of section 42;
(l) the manner of reporting incidents under sub-section (1) of
section 44;
(m) the form, manner and time for reporting arrival of vessel at
port under section 49; 25
(n) the manner of reporting of incidents under section 67;
(o) the provision of shore based welfare services under section 68.
79. (1) The Council may, by notification and subject to the condition of
Power of
Council to make previous publication, make regulations consistent with this Act and the rules made
regulations. thereunder to carry out the provisions of this Act. 30
(2) In particular, and without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing power,
such regulations may provide for all or any of the following matters, namely:—
(a) the manner and conditions subject to which the Chairperson may
invite persons to meetings of the Council under sub-section (3) of section 3;
(b) the manner of transaction of business at meetings of the Council 35
under sub-section (4) of section 3;
(c) any such other matters which is to be, or may be, specified by
regulations.
Power of 80. (1) The Council may, by notification, issue such guidelines consistent with
Council to issue this Act and the rules made thereunder to carry out the provisions of this Act. 40
guidelines.
(2) In particular, and without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing power,
such guidelines may provide for all or any of the following matters, namely:—
(a) the data or information to be collected and manner of collection,
storage, updation and submission of such data or information to the Council
under item (A) of sub-clause (ii) of clause (b) of sub-section (1) of section 6; 45
25
(b) the manner of dissemination of information, records, data and
research studies relating to ports, under item (B) of sub-clause (ii) of
clause (b) of sub-section (1) of section 6;
(c) the matters in relation to the transparency of port tariff and its
5 components under sub-section (4) of section 47;
(d) such other matters as it may deem fit.
81. (1) Every rule made by the Central Government and every regulation made Laying of rules
under this Act shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is made, before each House and regulations
before
of Parliament, while it is in session, for a total period of thirty days which may be
' Parliament and
10 comprised in one session or in two or more successive sessions, and if, before the State
expiry of the session immediately following the session or the successive sessions Legislature.
aforesaid, both Houses agree in making any modification in the rule or regulation
or both Houses agree that the rule or regulation should not be made, the rule or
regulation shall thereafter have effect only in such modified form or be of no effect,
15 as the case may be; so, however, that any such modification or annulment shall be
without prejudice to the validity of anything previously done under that rule or
regulation.
(2) Every rule made by the State Government shall be laid, as soon as may be
after it is made, before each House of the State Legislature where it consists of two
20 Houses, or where such Legislature consists of one House, before that House.
82. No suit or other legal proceeding shall lie against the Central Government Protection of
or the State Government or the Council or the Authority or the employees of the action taken in
Government or the members or employees of the Council or the Authority, in
good faith.
respect of anything which is done or intended to be done or any action taken in good
25 faith under this Act or any rules or regulations made thereunder.
83. (1) The Central Government may, by notification, amend column (4) of Power to amend
the Second Schedule, increasing the amount of penalty which shall not exceed more Second
Schedule.
than twice the amount of penalty when the Act was first enacted.
(2) Every notification issued under sub-section (1), shall be laid before each
30 House of Parliament as soon as may be after it is issued.
84. (1) If any difficulty arises in giving effect to the provisions of this Act, the Power to remove
Central Government may, by order published in the Official Gazette, make such difficulties.
provisions not inconsistent with the provisions of this Act as may appear to it to be
necessary or expedient for removing the difficulty:
35
Provided that no such order shall be made after the expiry of a period of three
years from the date of commencement of this Act.
(2) Every order made under this section shall be laid, as soon as may be after
it is made, before each House of Parliament.
15 of 1908. 85. (1) The Indian Ports Act, 1908 is hereby repealed. Repeal and
savings.
40 (2) Notwithstanding such repeal,—
(a) any notification, rule, regulation, bye-law, order or exemption made,
issued or granted under the Act so repealed shall have effect as if it had been made,
issued or granted under the provisions of this Act, till new notification, rule,
regulation, bye-law, order or exemption is made, issued or granted under this Act;
(b) any office established or created, officer or person appointed and any
45
body constituted under the Act so repealed shall continue and shall be deemed
to have been established, created, appointed or constituted under this Act;
(c) any document referring to the Act so repealed shall be construed as
referring to this Act or to the provision of this Act;
26
(d) any fine or penalty levied under the Act so repealed may be recovered
as if it had been levied under this Act;
(e) any offence committed under the Act so repealed may be prosecuted
and punished as if it had been committed under this Act;
(f) any proceeding pending before any court under the Act so repealed 5
may be tried or disposed of under the corresponding provisions of this Act;
(g) any inspection, investigation or inquiry ordered to be done under the
provisions of the Act so repealed shall continue to be proceeded with as if such
inspection, investigation or inquiry is ordered to be done under the
corresponding provisions of this Act. 10
(3) The mention of particular matters in this section shall not be held to
prejudice or affect the general application of section 6 of the General Clauses
Act, 1897, with regard to the effect of repeals. 10 of 1897.
27
THE FIRST SCHEDULE
[See section 53(2)]
Punishment for certain offences
Serial Offences. Section to which Punishment.
No. offence is referred.
(1) (2) (3) (4)
1. If any port 10 Fine which may
commences or carries extend to one lakh
on operations in rupees and in addition,
contravention of a fine which may
section 10 extend to ten thousand
rupees for every day
during which the
offence continues
after conviction.
2. If any port other 15(3) In case of
than major port or contravention by port
port officer fails to officer, fine which
comply with may extend to ten
directions of the State thousand rupees and
Maritime Board in addition, fine not
under sub-section (3) exceeding one
of section 15 thousand rupees for
every day during
which the offence
continues after
conviction.
In case of
contravention by port,
fine which may extend
to two lakh rupees and
in addition, fine not
exceeding twenty
thousand rupees for
every day during which
the offence continues
after conviction.
3. If any master of a 27 Imprisonment
vessel fails to permit qwhich may extend to
warps or hawsers to be six months or fine
made fast or let go of which may extend to
any warps or hawsers one lakh rupees or
in contravention of both.
section 27
4. If master omits to 28 Imprisonment
take order to which may extend to
extinguish the fire or six months or fine
obstructs the which may extend to
conservator or any one lakh rupees or
person in both.
extinguishing or
attempting to
extinguish the fire, in
contravention of
section 28
27
28
(1) (2) (3) (4)
5. If any person does 29(1) Imprisonment
or omits to do any act which may extend to
relating to safety of six months or fine
vessels in which may extend to
contravention of one lakh rupees or
sub-section (1) of both.
section 29
6. If the master of the 29(2) Imprisonment
vessel causes or which may extend to
suffer any warp or six months or fine
hawser attached to his which may extend to
vessel to be left out in one lakh rupees or
any port in both.
contravention of sub-
section (2) of
section 29
7. If any person 29(3) Imprisonment
commits any act in which may extend to
contravention of sub- six months or fine
section (3) of which may extend to
section 29 one lakh rupees or
both.
8. If any 30 Imprisonment
unauthorised person which may extend to
searches for lost six months or fine
stores in which may extend to
contravention of one lakh rupees or
section 30 both.
9. If any person 31 Imprisonment
injures any bank or which may extend to
shore in six months or fine
contravention of which may extend to
section 31 one lakh rupees or
both.
10. If any port fails to 36 Fine which may
provide adequate extend to two lakh
reception facilities in rupees.
contravention of
section 36
11. If any port fails to 37 Fine which may
comply with extend to one lakh
directions of the rupees and in addition,
Central Government fine which may extend
under section 37 to twenty thousand
rupees for everyday
during which the
offence continues
after conviction.
12. If any port fails to 38 (1) Fine which may
prepare a port waste extend to one lakh
reception and rupees.
handling plan in
contravention of
sub-section (1) of
section 38
29
(1) (2) (3) (4)
13. If any port fails to 38(2) Fine which may
implement the extend to one lakh
approved port waste rupees.
reception and
handling plan in
contravention of sub-
section (2) of section
38
14. If any port fails to 38(3) Fine which may
communicate any extend to twenty
information to thousand rupees.
vessels in
contravention of
sub-section (3) of
section 38
15. If any port fails to 44(1) Fine which may
report the particulars extend to one lakh
of any incident in rupees.
contravention of
sub-section (1) of
section 44
16. If any port fails to 44(2) Fine which may
comply with the extend to one lakh
directions issued by rupees and in addition,
the Central fine which may extend
Government under to ten thousand rupees
sub-section (2) of for every day during
section 44 which the offence
continues after
conviction.
17. If any port fails to 66(1) Fine which may
prepare a safety, extend to two lakh
security, disaster rupees.
management and
pollution incident
emergency
preparedness and
response plan in
contravention of sub-
section (1) of section 66
18. If any port fails to 66(4) Fine which may
comply with the extend to two lakh
directions issued by the rupees.
conservator in
contravention of sub-
section (4) of section 66
19. If any port fails to 67 Fine which may
report particulars of extend to one lakh
any incident in rupees.
contravention of
section 67
20. If any port fails to 68 Fine which may
provide shore based extend to twenty
welfare services in thousand rupees.
contravention of
section 68
30
(1) (2) (3) (4)
21. If any port fails to 69(1) Fine which may
comply with extend to fifty
directions of the thousand rupees.
Central Government
issued under
sub-section (1) of
section 69
22. If any port fails to 69(2) Fine which may
develop or maintain a extend to one lakh
vessel traffic service rupees.
in contravention of
sub-section (2) of
section 69
23. If any port fails to 71 Fine which may
obtain prior clearance extend to fifty
in contravention of thousand rupees.
section 71
31
THE SECOND SCHEDULE
[See section 53(3)]
Penalty for certain contraventions
Serial No. Contravention Section Penalties
(1) (2) (3) (4)
1. If any person refuses 19 Penalty which may
or neglects to obey any extend to fifty thousand
direction of the rupees and in addition,
conservator issued under penalty not exceeding five
section 19 thousand rupees for every
day during which the
contravention continues
after conviction.
2. If any owner has 20 Penalty which may
without lawful excuse extend to two lakh rupees
caused any obstruction or and in addition, penalty
impediment under not exceeding twenty
section 20 thousand rupees for every
day during which the
contravention continues
after conviction.
3. If any master of a 22(1) Penalty which may
vessel or any other extend to one lakh rupees.
person lifts the buoys or
moorings without
assistance of the
conservator in
contravention of sub-
section (1) of section 22
4. If the master of the 23 Penalty which may
vessel, or any person in extend to ten thousand
possession or occupation rupees for the first offence
of the building or place, and in addition, penalty
without lawful excuse, not exceeding ten
refuses to allow the thousand rupees for every
conservator or any day during which the
person to board or enter contravention continues.
such vessel, building or
place in contravention of
section 23
5. If any person without 26(1) Penalty which may
lawful excuse, removes, extend to one lakh rupees
destroys or damages any and in addition, expenses
property in contravention for any loss, destruction or
of sub-section (1) of damage suffered by the
section 26 port, including expenses of
any inspection or survey
carried out.
6. If any owner or master 32(1) Penalty which may
of a vessel enters, leaves extend to two lakh rupees.
or moves in any port in
contravention of sub-
section (1) of section 32.
31
32
(1) (2) (3) (4)
7. If any operator, agent or 39 Penalty which may
master of a vessel fails to extend to twenty thousand
submit an advance waste rupees.
notice in contravention of
section 39.
8. If any master of a 40(1) Penalty which may
vessel fails to deliver all extend to one lakh rupees.
its vessel-generated
waste to a reception
facility in contravention
of sub-section (1) of
section 40.
9. If the owner or master 41 Penalty which may
of any vessel fails to pay extend to twenty thousand
the charges payable or rupees and in addition,
fails to comply with the penalty which may extend
conditions under to two thousand rupees for
section 41 every day during which the
contravention continues.
10. If any person fails to 43 Penalty which may
upload information on the extend to ten thousand
portal in contravention of rupees.
section 43.
11. If the Authority or 47(2) Penalty which may
concessionaire or person extend to fifty thousand
or body of persons fails rupees and in addition,
to publish the port tariff penalty which may extend
in contravention of sub- to five thousand rupees for
section (2) of section 47 every day during which the
contravention continues.
12. If any owner, agent or 49 Penalty which may
master of a vessel fails to extend to twenty thousand
report the arrival of a rupees.
vessel in contravention
of section 49
13. If any master of a 52(1) Penalty which may
vessel fails to pay any extend to twice the amount
fees or other charges in of fees or other charges
contravention of sub- due, subject to a minimum
section (1) of section 52 of twenty thousand rupees.
14. If any person fails to 57 Penalty which may
furnish or furnishes extend to two lakh rupees
information in and in addition, penalty
contravention of which may extend to two
section 57 thousand rupees for every
day during which such
default continues.
15. If the master of any 65 Penalty which may
vessel unlawfully hoists extend to twenty thousand
or fails to hoist any flag rupees.
in contravention of
section 65
33
THE THIRD SCHEDULE
[See section 13(1)]
State Maritime Boards constituted or established under State Acts
Serial No. Name of State Name of State Act Date of
Maritime Board establishment
(1) (2) (3) (4)
1. Gujarat Gujarat Maritime The 3rd
Maritime Board Board Act, 1981 November, 1981
(Gujarat Act No. 30
of 1981)
2. Maharashtra Maharashtra The 4th October,
Maritime Board Maritime Board Act, 1996
1996
(Maharashtra Act
XV of 1997)
3. Tamil Nadu Tamil Nadu The 18th March,
Maritime Board Maritime Board Act, 1997
1995 (Tamil Nadu
Act No. 4 of 1996)
4. The West West Bengal The 1st October,
Bengal Maritime Maritime Board Act, 2015
Board 2000 (West Bengal
Act XXX of 2000)
5. Karnataka Karnataka The 9th
Maritime Board Maritime Board Act, September, 2019
2015 (Karnataka Act
41 of 2017)
6. Kerala Kerala Maritime The 2nd
Maritime Board Board Act, 2017 February, 2018
(Kerala Act 16 of
2017)
7. Andhra Pradesh Andhra Pradesh The 16th
Maritime Board Maritime Board Act, December, 2019
2018 (Andhra
Pradesh Act No. 16 of
2019)
8. Odisha State Odisha State The 28th March,
Maritime Board Maritime Board Act, 2022
2022 (Odisha Act No.
01 of 2022)
33
3 4
STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
The Indian Ports Act, 1908 (the 1908 Act) was a pre-independence legislation,
enacted to consolidate the laws on ports and port-charges. It consisted of provisions
on the powers of the Central Government and the State Governments for extending
or withdrawing the applicability of Act and altering port limits, appointment of
port-officials and their powers and duties, safety and conservation of ports, levy of
port-dues, fees and other charges, penalties and supplemental provisions.
2. India has witnessed expansion in the number of operational ports as well
as the overall traffic being handled at ports. Since the enactment of the 1908 Act,
there have been significant changes in both the commercial operations of ports and
the international norms for prevention of pollution of ports. In order to facilitate the
development of the port sector in a planned manner, it was felt necessary to reflect
the present-day frameworks, incorporate India’s international obligations, address
emerging environmental concerns and aid the consultative development of the ports
sector in the national interest.
3. The proposed legislation seeks to to effectively adopt international
obligations, allowing adequate power to frame subordinate legislation, keeping our
domestic priorities in mind. It further seeks to integrate development of ports so as to
utilise India’s coastline in a coherent and sustainable way. It also seeks to reinforce
and empower the State Maritime Boards to effectively administer, control and manage
ports other than major ports, within each coastal State and Union territory.
4. In view of the above, it has become imperative to repeal the Indian Ports
Act, 1908 and to provide for a contemporaneous and dynamic legislation to meet
the requirements of India as an emerging economy. The Indian Ports Bill, 2025,
inter alia, seeks to provide for the following, namely:––
(i) to define the term “appropriate Government” or “Government” and
clarify that in relation to major ports, means the Central Government; and in
relation to ports other than major ports, means the State Government;
(ii) applies to all existing ports to which the provisions of the Indian
Ports Act, 1908 applied; all new ports notified under the Bill; notified parts of
navigable river or channel which leads to such new port; all vessels within
port limits; and all aircrafts making use of any part of the port, while on water;
(iii) the establishment of a body to be notified as Maritime State
Development Council by the Central Government, which would be
responsible for making recommendations to the Government, inter alia,
including, efficient and conducive framework for ports in India; measures for
growth of the port sector and to promote competition and efficiency in the
operation of ports; and discharge other functions;
(iv) to empower the Government to notify a new port or to alter the limits
of any port;
(v) to empower the Central Government to formulate a national
perspective plan for the purposes of maritime trade and to prioritise associated
infrastructure development of ports;
(vi) to provide for statutory recognition to State Maritime Boards
established or constituted by the State Government or body of persons or a
department of the State Government executing such functions and empower
the State Maritime Boards with supervisory, developmental and other
functions for effective administration, control and management of ports other
than major ports;
(vii) to provide for the creation of new adjudicatory mechanism which
requires every State Government to constitute a Dispute Resolution
Committee, by notification, for the purposes of adjudicating any dispute
arising between ports other than major ports, concessionaires, port users and
34
35
port service providers within the State and bars the jurisdiction of civil courts
from entertaining any matter which the Dispute Resolution Committee is
empowered to determine under the Bill;
(viii) powers of conservators have been enlarged, for effective
superintendence over ports as far as safety and conservation of ports are concerned;
(ix) to mandate provision of reception facilities in compliance with the
International Convention for the Control and Management of Ships’ Ballast
Water and Sediments 2004 and the International Convention for the
Prevention of Pollution from Ships, 1973, including its Protocol of 1978;
(x) to provide for preparation of port waste reception and handling plan
by each port;
(xi) to empower Board of Major Port Authority or the board of directors,
where a major port is a company registered under the Companies Act, 2013,
to fix the port tariff for major ports and to empower the respective State
Maritime Boards to fix the port tariff for every port other than major port;
(xii) to provide for preparation of emergency preparedness and response
plan by each port for the purposes of safety, security, disaster management
and pollution incidents;
(xiii) to make provisions for offences and to empower the Judicial
Magistrate of first class to impose punishment against offences;
(xiv) to make provisions for penalties and procedure and to empower the
conservator to impose a penalty against those contraventions;
(xv) to empower the Central Government to direct ports to adopt
mechanism for electronically integrating port related data;
(xvi) requirement of prior clearance from the Central Government when
a port is undergoing change in substantial ownership or effective control;
(xvii) classification of a major port or a port other than major port as a
mega port by notification, when such port fulfils the criteria notified by the
Central Government in consultation with the State Government;
(xviii) to clarify that the Bill is in addition, and not in derogation to
existing legislations such as the Major Port Authorities Act, 2021 and the
Merchant Shipping Act, 1958;
(xix) to empower the Central Government to make such provisions not
inconsistent with the provisions of the Bill, as appear to it to be necessary or
expedient, for removing the difficulty before the expiry of a period of three
years from the date of commencement of the Bill;
(xx) to repeal the Indian Ports Act, 1908 and to provide for saving of
certain actions taken thereunder.
5. The Notes on clauses explain in detail the various provisions contained
in the Bill.
6. The Bill seeks to achieve the above objectives.
NEW DELHI; SARBANANDA SONOWAL.
The 18th March, 2025.
36
Notes on clauses
Clause 1.—This clause seeks to provide for short title, extent, commencement,
and application of the Bill. It specifies the application of the Bill, inter alia, to all
ports, parts of the navigable rivers and channels leading to such ports as may be
notified by the Government, all vessels within port limits and all aircrafts making
use of any port while on water. It also specifies the vessels to which the Bill shall
not be applicable, which include any port or navigable rivers or channels or vessels
or classes of vessels, any vessel or any aircraft making use of any part of the port
belonging to or exclusively servicing, for military or non-commercial service of the
Government, the Indian Navy, Indian Coast Guard, customs authorities, Central
Armed Forces and police and other agencies as may be notified by the Central
Government; any vessel belonging to or in service of the Central Government or
State Government, or any foreign vessel of war.
Clause 2.—This clause defines the various expressions used in the Bill which,
inter alia, include “appropriate Government” or “Government”, “concessionaire”,
“existing port”, “mega port”, “mooring”, “new port”, “port”, “port limits”, “port
tariff”, “port works”, “State”, “State Maritime Board”, “Schedule” “security” and
“vessel”.
Clause 3.—This clause seeks to provide for the establishment of the Maritime
State Development Council with the Union Minister of Ports, Shipping and
Waterways, Government of India, as Chairperson and other members namely, the
Minister in-charge of ports of each State; Minister-in-charge of the Union territory
of Puducherry and Administrators of all coastal Union territories; the Secretary or
equivalent rank to the Government of India in the Indian Navy dealing with coastal
security nominated by the Central Government in the Ministry of Defence; the
Secretary or equivalent rank to the Government of India in the Indian Coast Guard
dealing with coastal security nominated by the Central Government in the Ministry
of Defence and the Secretary to the Government of India in the Ministry of Ports,
Shipping and Waterways as the Member Secretary. The office of the member of the
Council is not deemed to be an office of profit.
Clause 4.—This clause empowers the Chairperson with the general
superintendence and directions in the conduct of affairs of the Council.
Clause 5.—This clause seeks to provide that no act or proceeding of the
Council shall be invalidated merely because of any vacancy in the Council, or any
defect in the constitution of the Council, or any defect in the appointment of a
member or any irregularity in the Council’s procedure provided such irregularity
does not affect the merits of the case.
Clause 6.—This clause seeks to specify the functions of the Council which,
inter alia, include making recommendations to the Government on the matters
specified therein; issuing guidelines, in consultation with the Central Government
and the State Governments on matters specified therein; and calling for information
from any Authority or port or person, for the purpose of discharging its functions.
Clause 7.—This clause seeks to empower the Central Government to make
officers and employees available for discharge of the functions of the Council. It
further empowers the Central Government to prescribe salaries, allowances, and
conditions of service of the employees of the Council.
Clause 8.—This clause seeks to empower the Central Government to make
grants to the Council of such sums of money required by it to discharge its functions
under this Bill.
Clause 9.—This clause seeks to empower the Council to delegate its powers
and functions subject to any conditions by general or special order in writing to any
member or employee of the Council, except the power to make regulations or to
issue guidelines.
36
37
Clause 10.—This clause seeks to disallow any port from commencing or
carrying on activities unless it is an existing port or a new port which is duly notified
in accordance with clause 11.
Clause 11.—This clause seeks to empower the Central Government to notify
a new port and to alter the limits of any port. It further provides that the notification
which alters the limits of any port shall not have retrospective effect. The clause also
empowers the Central Government in consultation with the State Government to
prescribe the norms, form and manner for declaring a new port and for altering the
port limits.
Clause 12.—This clause seeks to empower the Central Government to
formulate a national perspective plan for the purpose of maritime trade and to
prioritise associated infrastructure development. It provides that the Central
Government, State Governments and the Authority shall endeavour to adhere to the
national perspective plan formulated by the Central Government and guidelines
issued by the Council.
Clause 13.—This clause provides that every State Maritime Board established
or constituted by the State Government under any of the enactments specified in the
Third Schedule shall be deemed to be duly established or constituted under this Bill.
It provides where such State Maritime Board is not established or constituted, the
State Governments are obligated to establish and notify State Maritime Board. The
State Maritime Board shall be a distinct legal entity, having the power, subject to
the provisions of the Bill to contract, acquire, hold and dispose of property, to sue
or be sued. The State Government may specify by notification, the place where the
head office of the State Maritime Board shall be situated.
Clause 14.—This clause provides for transfer of assets and liabilities by the
State Government to the State Maritime Board. It provides that on and from the date
of establishment or the date of notification of the State Maritime Board, the State
Government shall transfer to the State Maritime Board and vest all port land,
property, assets, funds, interest in the property and all rights to levy rates, fee and
other sums of money vested or due in the State Government. It further provides that
all debts, obligations, contracts, and legal proceedings of the State Government
before the establishment or notification of the State Maritime Board shall be
transferred to the State Maritime Board. The State Maritime Board will continue all
suits or other legal proceedings initiated, on behalf or against the State Government.
Clause 15.—This clause specifies the various functions of the State Maritime
Board with respect to all the ports other than major ports within the territory of the
respective State, which, inter alia, include, initiating plans for development of ports;
promoting the use, development and improvement of ports; developing new ports,
subject to security clearance as per the guidelines issued by the Central Government.
It further seeks to empower the State Maritime Board to issue directions to any port
other than major port or to any officer of such port for discharging its functions
under the Bill.
Clause 16.—This clause seeks to mandate every State Government to
constitute by notification, a Dispute Resolution Committee consisting of not less
than three members, to adjudicate disputes between ports other than major ports,
concessionaires, port users and port service providers, unless the parties have agreed
to arbitration or any other dispute resolution mechanism. The time limit for deciding
any dispute is six months, which may be extended up to three more months at a time
after recording reasons for doing so, but not exceeding twelve months. It further
confers the Dispute Resolution Committee with the powers of a civil court. This
clause also provides that any party aggrieved by an order of the Dispute Resolution
Committee may prefer an appeal to the High Court of the appropriate jurisdiction,
within sixty days from the date on which a copy of the order is received by the party.
38
Clause 17.—This clause seeks to bar the jurisdiction of any civil court to
entertain any suit or proceeding in respect of any matter which the Dispute
Resolution Committee is empowered by or under this Bill to determine.
Clause 18.—This clause seeks to provide for the appointment of conservator
for every port or for two or more ports by the Government, and the conservator shall
be subject to the control of the Government and the Authority. It further mandates
every port to appoint a harbour master or such other officers of the port as may be
prescribed by rules made by the Government. All officers operating in a port shall
be subject to the supervision and control of the conservator. It also empowers the
conservator, with the approval of the Government, to delegate such powers to such
persons, as may be prescribed by rules made by the Government.
Clause 19.—This clause empowers the conservator to issue directions to any
vessel within the port for carrying out the provisions of this Bill or the rules made
thereunder, which, inter alia, include the berthing, mooring, anchoring of a vessel;
removal of a vessel from any place within the port and the time period within which
the same shall be done; regulate, restrict or prohibit the movement of vessels, direct
the master of the vessel to have adequate crew members; prohibit any vessel from
entering or leaving the port; or endangering the safety of any vessel in the port. It
further empowers the conservator to take any action and hold such person liable for
reimbursement of all expenses incurred in order to give effect to the directions in
case person refuses or neglects to obey with any directions of the conservator.
Clause 20.—This clause empowers the conservator to remove directly or
through another agency or port officer, any obstruction in the operation of a port or
part thereof of the port or any other work. It further requires the owner of such
obstruction to pay reasonable expenses incurred in such removal, however, if the
owner evades such payment, public auction of the object causing obstruction may
be conducted to recover the expenses and excess proceeds or part of the obstruction
shall be returned to the owner or deposited in the manner the Government may
direct. If the storage of the obstruction incurs expenses, the same may be recovered
by a further sale of the remaining unsold obstruction. This clause also states that in
case of an impediment sought to be removed by the conservator exists on account
of permission from the Government, the conservator shall obtain prior sanction for
removal from the Government. The owner of the obstruction in this case shall
receive due compensation contingent on factors prescribed by rules made by the
appropriate Government.
Clause 21.—This clause seeks to empower the Government to specify by
notification, the restrictions on certain activities within port limits that may cause
any impediment to the navigation in a port.
Clause 22.—This clause restricts the master of the vessel, except in the case
of an emergency, from lifting any buoy or mooring in a port, laid down by the
conservator, without the conservator’s assistance where such vessel hooks or gets
foul. It further provides that conservator, immediately on receiving notice of any
such emergency under this clause, shall assist and superintend the clearing of such
vessel. This clause also puts an obligation on the vessel master to pay for the
reasonable expenses incurred in clearing the same.
Clause 23.—This clause empowers the conservator, either alone or with any
other person or body of person to board any vessel or enter any building or place
within port limits to board any vessel, or enter any building or place whenever is it
necessary for performance of duties under the Bill. This clause prevents a master of
a vessel or any person in possession or occupation of the building or place, from
disallowing boarding such vessel or entering such building or place without lawful
excuse.
39
Clause 24.—This clause empowers the Government to appoint an empanelled
medical practitioner as a health officer to undertake the functions of a port
health-officer at any port to, inter alia, inspect water, sanitation and accommodation
facilities of a vessel, board any vessel and medically examine any person on the
vessel as well as enforce production of any document to inquire into the health and
medical conditions of any person on the vessel. This clause further empowers the
Government to declare any port or part thereof an infected zone when any infectious
or contagious disease has broken out, or is reasonably suspected to break out and
prescribe measures to be taken. This clause also empowers the conservator to take
actions and pass directions for prevention or containment of any disease in vessels
arriving at or being in port. The master shall report the particulars of any such
disease in such vessels to either the Government or the conservator. It also
empowers the health officer along with such person or body of persons authorised
by the Government, to board the vessel for medical inspection of either the vessel
or any person on vessel.
Clause 25.—This clause provides indemnity to the Government from any act
or default of any conservator, harbour master or any other port officers, their
deputies or assistants of authorities in any port or any person acting under the control
or direction of any authority or their assistant or any act or default of any pilot or for
any damage caused to the vessel due to any defect in the moorings, hawsers or any
other thing belonging to the Government. This clause further provides that the
provision does not apply to any suit against the Government on any act done under
any order or sanction of the Government.
Clause 26.—This clause bars any person, without lawful excuse, from
removing, destroying or damaging any property including pier or wharf which
belongs to, in custody or in the possession of the port or hinder or prevent the
operation of any such property. This clause obligates any person who contravenes
the provision to pay for any loss, destruction or damage suffered by the port which
also includes the cost of inspection or survey, in addition to any other penalty as
specified under the Second Schedule of the Bill.
Clause 27.—This clause obligates the master of any vessel to allow warps or
hawsers to be fastened to the vessel for warping another vessel in the port, as and
when required by the conservator and to not let go off such warp or hawser until
directed by the conservator to do so.
Clause 28.—This clause seeks to impose an obligation on the master of the
vessel to co-operate with and take orders from, the conservator or any person
authorised by the conservator, to extinguish any fire on the vessel.
Clause 29.—This clause seeks to bar a person on a vessel from various actions
that impact the safety of the vessel and its surroundings, including inter alia,
willfully loosening or removing the moorings from a vessel without being
authorised to do so, lifting, injuring or making a vessel fast to loosen or set adrift
any moorings, buoys, beacons or sea or landmarks or discharges any firearm in the
port or commits an action or abstains from one which causes or may cause fire
onboard a vessel or uses a vessel in state of defective condition, which makes the
life of any person or the safety of another vessel, likely to be endangered. This clause
further states that the master of a vessel shall not leave a warp or hawser attached to
his vessel, in the port, causing danger to the safety of another vessel in the port. It
also prohibits commission of any act in relation to any combustible matter which is
prohibited by the Government or contrary to the orders or directions of the
conservator.
Clause 30.—This clause prohibits any person from creeping or sweeping for
anchors, cables without the conservator’s permission.
40
Clause 31.—This clause bars any person from disturbing the existing
waterbed or geophysical structures or any kind of artificial protection or shore of
the port without the conservator’s permission and under the supervision of such
person as may be appointed by the conservator. It further bars any person from
sinking or burying any mooring-post, anchor or any other thing or do anything
which may damage any part of the bank or shore.
Clause 32.—This clause seeks to mandate that vessels shall not leave or move
in any port without a pilot, harbour master or port officer on board the vessel, unless
the vessel has the conservator’s written permission unless upon application to the
proper officer, the master was unable to procure a pilot, harbour master or port
officer to go on board the vessel. This clause empowers the Government to specify
by notification that this clause will not apply to sailing vessels of any measurement
not exceeding a measurement specified in the notification. This clause also provide
that the owner or master of the vessel shall be answerable for any damage caused
by the vessel or fault of navigation of the vessel.
Clause 33.—This clause directs every port officer in a port to co-operate with
any officer authorised by a general or special order of the Central Government for
carrying out any manoeuvres which is part of any scheme or preparations for the
defence of the port during time of war, or for the security of the port from any
sub-conventional or non-traditional threats, or natural disasters. This clause further
puts an obligation on the Government to bear the running expenses of such vessels
which are used during time of war.
Clause 34.—This clause provides for the Authority and Director General to
regulate certain activities specified therein.
Clause 35.—This clause seeks to define certain expressions which are specific
to Chapter VIII, such as “Ballast Water Management Convention”, “MARPOL
Convention”, “reception facility”, “waste from vessels”, “cargo residues”.
Clause 36.—This clause seeks to mandate every port to provide reception
facilities adequate to meet the needs of vessels normally using a port without
causing undue delay to vessels, in order to comply with the requirements of relevant
provisions in the MARPOL Convention and the Ballast Water Management
Convention. Further, this clause explains the term “adequate” as capable of
receiving the types and quantities of wastes from vessels normally using that port,
taking into account the operational needs of the port users, its size and geographical
location, the types of vessels calling there.
Clause 37.—This clause seeks to empower the Central Government to
mandate any port, by way of a written order, which has no reception facility or
whose facilities are not “adequate”, on the basis of an audit conducted or otherwise,
to provide or arrange the reception facilities specified in the order.
Clause 38.—This clause requires every port to prepare a port waste reception
and handling plan as prescribed by rules made by the Central Government in
consultation with the State Government. The port waste reception and handling plan
approved by the Central Government is required to be implemented by the port. This
clause further mandates every port to communicate information about the plan to
the vessels in the manner prescribed by rules.
Clause 39.—This clause seeks to obligate the operator, agent or master of a
vessel bound for India to submit an advance waste notification to the port of call in
the form and manner and within the time period prescribed by rules made by the
Central Government in consultation with the State Government.
Clause 40.—This clause seeks to obligate the master of a vessel calling at a
port, to deliver all its vessel generated waste to a reception facility, as per the
conditions prescribed by rules. It requires the port where the waste is delivered to
issue a waste delivery receipt to the master of the vessel in the form and manner
prescribed by rules.
41
Clause 41.—This clause seeks to empower a port providing reception facilities
or person providing such facilities, to levy reasonable charges for use of the
reception facilities. On payment of all charges and subject to compliance with all
conditions imposed, any reception facility provided at the port shall be made
available for use by any vessel.
Clause 42.—This clause requires the Central Government to audit every port
for the availability and adequacy of reception facilities and also audit such pollution
containment equipment as may be specified by the Central Government, at such
intervals, and in the manner prescribed by the Central Government in consultation
with the State Government.
Clause 43.—This clause seeks to empower the Central Government to specify
by notification the manner in which and the person by whom the information will
be uploaded on the Portal. This includes advance waste notification as specified
under clause 39; waste delivery receipts under sub-clause (2) of clause 40; request
by a vessel for availing reception facilities and such other matters.
Clause 44.—This clause seeks to obligate every port to report to the
Government, any incident that threatens or is likely to pose a threat of pollution to
the coastal waters, in the manner prescribed by rules. It further empowers the
Central Government to issue appropriate directions to any port or State Government
or Authority or organisation, in case it is satisfied that an incident which threatens
or is likely to pose a threat of pollution of the coastal waters has taken place or is
likely to take place, to prevent or contain such pollution in accordance with
applicable law. It also explains the meaning of coastal waters for the purposes of
this clause.
Clause 45.—This clause seeks to empower the Government to issue
appropriate directions to any port or port officer to ensure compliance with any of
the provisions of Chapter VIII.
Clause 46.—This clause specifies fee and other charges which shall be
leviable in ports.
Clause 47.—This clause seeks to authorise the State Maritime Board or an
authorised concessionaire to fix the port tariff for every port other than major port.
Further, the Board of Major Port Authority or such person or body of persons
authorised by the Board of Major Port Authority or board of directors where port is
registered as a company under the Companies Act, 2013 will fix the port tariff for
every major port. The port tariff fixed shall be published electronically and shall
come into effect after expiry of a period of thirty days from the date of its
publication. This clause also allows the Council to issue guidelines on any matter
related to transparency of port tariff including its components. It further empowers
the Authority on the basis of recommendations by the Government to exempt or
remit the whole or any portion of fee or other charges payable under the Bill.
Clause 48.—This clause empowers Government to authorise by way of
notification, an officer or body of persons at the port, to receive the fees or other
charges payable under the Bill and to expend the receipts as may be specified in the
notification. It requires such officer or body of persons to issue receipts in lieu of
such fee or other charges. These receipts shall contain the particulars as specified
under this clause.
Clause 49.—This clause obligates the owner, agent or master of every vessel
required to pay any fee or other charges, to report the vessel’s arrival within port
limits in such form, manner and within such period as may be prescribed by rules.
42
Clause 50.—This clause empowers the officer or body of persons authorised
under sub-clause (1) of clause 48, to detain or arrest the vessel, if the master of any
vessel refuses or neglects to pay fees and other charges on demand, until such
amount is paid. It further empowers the officer or body of persons to sell off the
detained or arrested vessel to recover the costs if the fees or other charges remain
unpaid for fifteen days. In cases where a vessel is already arrested under the order
of a court or other authority, prior permission of such court or the authority must be
taken to make the sale and disburse the surplus according to guidelines. This clause
also covers conditions in which the sale proceeds of the vessel are insufficient to
satisfy the fee or other charges.
Clause 51.—This clause mandates that the port-clearance shall not be granted
to any vessel until the amount of fees or other charges and fines, penalties and
expenses have been paid by the owner or master or agent or port user, to the
satisfaction of the officer granting the clearance.
Clause 52.—This clause mandates that no vessel master shall evade the
payment of fees or other charges, liable to be paid under the Bill. It further states
that in any proceeding before a Magistrate any document issued stating that the
master has evaded such payments, shall be sufficient prima facie proof of the
evasion, unless the master can prove that such a departure happened due to the stress
of weather, or there was a lawful and reasonable ground for such departure. Any
Magistrate having jurisdiction under this Bill, in any port to which the vessel may
proceed, or on which she may be found shall have jurisdiction in any proceeding
under this clause.
Clause 53.—This clause states that any person who contravenes any provision
or fails to comply with any provision of the Bill shall be liable to penalty. The First
Schedule pertains to offences for which fines or imprisonment is specified and the
Second Schedule pertains to contraventions for which penalties have been specified.
This clause seeks to specify that any contravention or failure to comply with the
provisions of the Bill, rules or regulations under the Bill which do not have a
separate penalty, shall be punishable with a fine up to ten thousand rupees, and if
the breach is a continuing one, with further fine which may extend to one thousand
rupees for every day, after the first day, during which the breach continues.
Clause 54.—This clause specifies that the authority for imposing the penalty
for contravention specified in the table under the Second Schedule will be the
conservator. It further empowers the Central Government to notify an officer to
compound first contravention of any provision under the Bill.
Clause 55.—This Clause specifies that no court inferior to that of a Judicial
Magistrate of the first class shall try any offence specified in the First Schedule
under the Bill.
Clause 56.—This clause seeks to specify the penalty for wilful failure to
comply with any order of the Dispute Resolution Committee. Where no appeal has
been preferred against such order of the Dispute Resolution Committee, penalty
extending up to one lakh rupees with an additional penalty of one thousand rupees
each day for continuing default shall be imposed.
Clause 57.—This clause provides that no person shall make any statement or
furnish any document which the person knows or has reason to believe to be false
in any material particular or omit to state any material fact knowing it to be material,
or wilfully alter, suppress or destroy any document which is required to be
furnished.
Clause 58.—This clause states that any fine imposed by the Magistrate or
penalty imposed by the conservator, may be recovered by distress and sale of vessel
or part of vessel, as may be deemed necessary.
43
Clause 59.—This clause states that if any dispute as to the sum to be paid as
expenses or damages under this Bill arises, it shall be determined by the Magistrate,
upon application made to him for that purpose by either of the disrupting parties.
Further, any sum payable as expenses or damages under the Bill that do not exceed
twenty thousand rupees, may be recovered by the conservator or Magistrate as if it
were a penalty or fine.
Clause 60.—This clause seeks to provide that the cost of distress or sale may
be levied in addition to any penalty, fine, expenses or damages.
Clause 61.—This clause seeks to provide that in case of any dispute about the
amount leviable by any distress or arrest under the Bill and costs payable for distress,
the person making the distress or arrest may detain the goods and proceeds of the
sale until the Magistrate determines the amount to be levied. Such amount shall be
determined by the Magistrate pursuant to an application made to him in that regard
to be paid as costs, which if not paid on demand shall be enforced as a fine.
Clause 62.—This clause seeks to provide that any person committing any
offence under the Bill or the corresponding rules may be tried at a place in which he
may be found, or by any Magistrate having jurisdiction over the district or place
adjoining the port where the offence has taken place, or in any court where the
person might be tried under any other law for the time being in force. All powers of
a Magistrate under the Bill shall be exercised by such Magistrate in such manner as
if the offence had been committed under his jurisdiction even if the same was
committed outside the limits of his jurisdiction.
Clause 63.—This clause seeks to provide that in case the person committing
an offence under the Bill is a company, every person who, at the time the offence
was committed, was in charge of, and was responsible to the company for the
conduct of its business, as well as the company, shall be deemed to be guilty of the
offence and shall be liable to be proceeded against and punished accordingly. If such
person proves that the offence was committed without his knowledge or that he
exercised all due diligence to prevent the commission of such offence, such person
need not to be subject to punishment. However, if it is proved that the offence was
committed with the consent or connivance of, or is attributable to any neglect, such
person shall be punished accordingly. This clause also explains the meaning of
“company” and “director” for this clause.
Clause 64.—This clause seeks to provide the manner of service of documents
on any person, such as, personal delivery, leaving the same at his last place of
residence, or by post. If such delivery is to be made to the harbour master of a port,
it may be left at the port or with a person in command at the port; in case of a master
of a vessel, such document may be left on board with person in command of the
vessel and if no master or owner or agent is there, it may be affixed on the vessel or
at a suitable place on the bridge.
Clause 65.—This clause prohibits vessels from hoisting, carrying or wearing
any flag, jack, pennant or colours at any port, the use of which is unlawful. It further
imposes an obligation on foreign vessels to hoist the flag of Republic of India and
the flag of the country of the vessel while calling at a port in India.
Clause 66.—This clause mandates every port to prepare emergency
preparedness and response plan. It further empowers the Central Government to
approve such a plan as well as to audit the port to ensure compliance with this clause.
This clause also empowers the conservator to issue directions for the
implementation of the approved plan. It also empowers the Central Government to
issue directions to any person in order to ensure compliance with this clause and put
in place a national emergency response mechanism.
44
Clause 67.—This clause imposes an obligation on every port to report the
particulars of any incident such as property damage, sinking of vessels, collision of
vessels, fire, in such manner as may be prescribed by rules.
Clause 68.—This clause obligates every port to provide shore-based welfare
services for seafarers of vessels calling at the port, as may be prescribed by rules.
Clause 69.—This clause empowers the Central Government to direct a port to
adopt a mechanism for electronically integrating such port related data with the port
community system. It further obligates every port to maintain an effective vessel
traffic service within port limits in accordance with applicable law. This clause also
explains the meaning of port community system and vessel traffic system.
Clause 70.—This clause empowers the Central Government to issue
directions to port, port facilities, port officer or any person, to ensure compliance
with provisions of the Merchant Shipping Act, 1958.
Clause 71.—This clause seeks to require any port undergoing a change in
substantial ownership or effective control, to obtain prior clearance from the Central
Government or a person authorised by the Central Government, in such form and
manner and within such time as may be notified.
Clause 72.—This clause mandates that obligations under the international
conventions to which India is a party are discharged in accordance with such
conventions, as may be prescribed by rules made by the Central Government.
Clause 73.—This clause seeks to empower the Central Government, in
consultation with the State Government, to specify by notification the criteria for
classification of one or more port as a mega port. It further empowers the Central
Government in the case of a major port, and in consultation with the State
Government in the case of a port other than major port, to notify a port as a mega
port. Irrespective of such classification as a mega port, such major port a port other
than major port shall retain its status and continue to be governed by the respective
laws applicable to them.
Clause 74.—This clause seeks to provide that all members, officers and other
employees of the Maritime State Development Council when acting in pursuance of
the provisions of the Bill shall be deemed to be public servants under clause (28) of
section 2 of the Bharatiya Nyaya Sanhita, 2023.
Clause 75.—This clause mandates that the provisions of the Bill shall be in
addition to and not in derogation of the Major Port Authorities Act, 2021 and
Merchant Shipping Act, 1958, in so far as it relates to ports.
Clause 76.—This clause enumerates the matters in respect of which the
Central Government may make rules to carry out the purposes of the Bill.
Clause 77.—This clause enumerates the matters in respect of which the State
Government may make rules to carry out the purposes of the Bill.
Clause 78.—This clause enumerates the matters in respect of which the
Central Government in consultation with the State Government make rules to carry
out the purpose of the Bill.
Clause 79.—This clause seeks to enumerates the matters in respect of which
the Council may make regulations governing its administrative functioning of ports.
Clause 80.—This clause seeks to enumerates the matters in respect of which
the Council may frame guidelines consistent with the Bill and the rules made
thereunder to carry out the provisions of this Bill.
Clause 81.—This clause mandates that every rule and every regulation made
under the Bill shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is made, before each House of
Parliament, while it is in session, for a total period of thirty days which may be
comprised in one session or in two or more successive sessions. It further provides
that every rule made by the State Government shall be laid, as soon as it is made,
before the State Legislature.
45
Clause 82.—This clause seeks to protect the Government, the Council, the
Authority or any member or any employee of the Council or the Authority from any
suit or other legal proceedings for an action done in good faith under the Bill, or any
rules or any regulations made under the Bill.
Clause 83.—This clause empowers the Central Government to notify and
increase the amount of penalty specified in the Second Schedule, not exceeding,
twice the amount that has been specified. It further provides that each notification
shall be laid before each House of Parliament as soon as after it is issued.
Clause 84.—This clause seeks to empower the Central Government to make,
by order published in the Official Gazette, provisions for removal of difficulties in
giving effect to the provisions of the Bill and restrict the power to make such order
within a period of three years from the commencement of the Bill and mandates
every such order to be laid before each House of Parliament.
Clause 85.—This clause seeks to repeal the Indian Ports Act, 1908 and to
provide for the saving of various actions undertaken under the said Act. It further
states that provisions of section 6 of the General Clauses Act, 1897 shall be
applicable to the repealed enactment.
46
FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM
The Bill seeks to repeal the Indian Ports Act, 1908 and to introduce the Indian
Ports Bill, 2025.
2. Clause 3 of the Bill seeks to provide for the establishment of a Council, for
the purposes of this Bill to be called the Maritime State Development Council.
Clause 8 of the Bill provides that the Central Government may, after due
appropriation made by Parliament, make grants as required by the Maritime State
Development Council, to discharge its functions under this Bill.
3. The expenditure to be incurred towards the said body would be met from
budgetary allocation after such allocation by the Department of Expenditure, as and
when the body will be constituted. This expenditure is not quantifiable at this stage
as the structure, posts, number of officers and other aspects are not final.
4. The Bill, if enacted, will not involve any other expenditure, either recurring
or non-recurring nature from the Consolidated Fund of India.
46
47
MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION
Clause 76 of the Indian Ports Bill, 2025 seeks to empower the Central
Government to make rules to carry out the provisions of the Bill, subject to the
condition of previous publication. Sub-clause (2) of the said clause specifies the
matters in respect of which such rules may be made. These matters include, (i) the
salary and allowances and other conditions of service of the employees of the
Council under sub-clause (2) of clause 7; (ii) other officers of the port to be
appointed under sub-clause (2) of clause 18; (iii) the terms and conditions of service
of the officers under sub-clause (3) of clause 18; (iv) the powers to be delegated by
the conservator and the persons to whom such powers may be delegated under sub-
clause (6) of clause 18; (v) the manner of removal or alteration of obstruction and
factors for determining compensation under sub-clause (5) of clause 20; (vi) the
qualifications, experience and other terms and conditions of service of the health
officer to be appointed under sub- clause (2) of clause 24; (vii) the measures to be
taken at infected zone under sub-clause (4) (b) of clause 24; (viii) the factors to be
considered by the conservator in determining the expenses to be paid by under sub-
clause (2) of clause 26; (ix) the form and manner of receipt of fees or other charges
under sub-clause (2) of clause 48; (x) the manner of appointment of conservator
from a body of persons under sub-clause (2) of clause 54; and (xi) the obligations to
be discharged by the ports under sub-clause (2) of clause 72.
2. Clause 77 of the Bill seeks to empower the State Government to make rules
to carry out the provisions of the Bill, subject to the condition of previous
publication. Sub-clause (2) of the said clause specifies the matters in respect of
which such rules may be made. These matters include, (i) the form and manner of
making an application for adjudication of disputes referred to the State Maritime
Board under sub-clause (2) of clause 16; (ii) other matters in respect of which the
State Maritime Board shall exercise powers of civil court under sub-clause (4) (d)
of clause 16; (iii) other officers of the port to be appointed under sub-clause (2) of
clause 18; (iv) the terms and conditions of service of officers under sub-clause (3)
of clause 18; (v) the powers to be delegated by the conservator and the persons to
whom such powers may be delegated sub-clause (6) of clause 18; (vi) the manner
of removal or alteration of obstruction and factors for determining compensation
under sub-clause (5) of clause 20; (vii) the qualification, experience and other terms
and conditions of service of the health officer to be appointed under sub-clause (2)
of clause 24; (viii) the measures to be taken at infected zone under sub-clause (4)
(b) of clause 24; (ix) the factors to be considered by the conservator in determining
the expenses to be paid under sub-clause (2) of clause 26; (x) the form and manner
of receipt of fees or other charges under sub-clause (2) of clause 48; and (xi) the
manner of appointment of conservator from a body of persons under sub-clause (2)
of clause 54.
3. Clause 78 of the Bill seeks to empower the Central Government in
consultation with State Governments to make rules, to carry out the provisions of
the Bill, subject to the condition of previous publication. Sub-clause (2) of the said
clause specifies the matters in respect of which rules may be made. These matters
include, (i) the form and manner of notification of any part of the navigable rivers
or channels leading to ports under sub-clause (3) (a) (iii) of clause 1; (ii) the norms,
form and manner of notifying a new port and altering port limits under sub-clause
(2) of clause 11; (iii) the action to be taken by the conservator and the directions to
be issued to the persons sub-clause (5) (a) of clause 24; (iv) the manner of reporting
of disease by the master under sub-clause (5) (b) of clause 24; (v) the conditions
subject to which port shall provide reception facilities under clause 36; (vi) the form
and manner of preparing port waste reception and handling plan under sub-clause
(1) of clause 38; (vii) the information about the port waste reception and handling
plan and manner of communicating such information under sub-clause (3) of
clause 38; (viii) the form, manner and time for submitting an advance waste notice
under clause 39; (ix) the conditions for delivery of vessel-generated waste under
47
48
sub-clause (1) of clause 40; (x) the form and manner of issuance of waste delivery
receipt under sub-clause (2) of clause 40; (xi) the intervals and manner of conducting
audit of ports under sub-clause (1) of clause 42; (xii) the manner of reporting
incidents under sub-clause (1) of clause 44; (xiii) the form, manner and time for
reporting arrival of vessel at port under clause 49; (xiv) the manner of reporting of
incidents under clause 67; and (xv) the provisions of shore-based welfare services
under clause 68.
4. Clause 79 of the Bill seeks to empower the Maritime State Development
Council to make regulations, to carry out the provisions of the Bill, subject to the
condition of previous publication. Sub-clause (2) of the said clause specifies the
matters in respect of which rules may be made. These matters include, (i) the manner
and conditions subject to which the Chairperson may invite persons to meetings of
the Council under sub-clause (3) of clause 3; (ii) the manner of transaction of
business at meetings of the Council under sub-clause (4) of clause 3; and (iii) any
such other matters which is to be, or may be, specified by regulations.
5. The matters in respect of which the aforementioned rules and regulations
may be made are matters of procedure and administrative details, and as such, it is
not practicable to provide for them in the Bill itself. The delegation of legislative
power is, therefore, of a normal character.
49
50
LOK SABHA
———
A
BILL
to consolidate the law relating to ports, promote integrated port development,
facilitate ease of doing business and ensure the optimum utilisation of India's
coastline; establish and empower State Maritime Boards for effective
management of ports other than major ports; establish the Maritime State
Development Council for fostering structured growth and development of the
port sector; provide for the management of pollution, disaster, emergencies,
security, safety, navigation, and data at ports; ensure compliance with India’s
obligations under international instruments to which it is a party; take
measures for the conservation of ports; provide for adjudicatory mechanisms
for the redressal of port-related disputes; and address matters connected
therewith or incidental thereto.
———
(Shri Sarbananda Sonowal, Minister of Ports, Shipping and Waterways)
