jftLVªh lañ Mhñ ,yñ—(,u)04@0007@2003—23 REGISTERED NO. DL—(N)04/0007/2003—23
सी.जी.-डीx.एxलx.G-अID.-0H2x0x2x2023-243355
CG-xDxLx-GE-I0D20E2x20x2x3-243355
vlk/kkj.k
EXTRAORDINARY
Hkkx II — [k.M 1
PART II—Section 1
izkf/kdkj ls izdkf'kr
PUBLISHED BY AUTHORITY
lña 3] ubZ fnYyh] c`gLifrokj] Qjojh 2] 2023@ek?k 13] 1944 ¼'kd½
No. 3] NEW DELHI, THURSDAY, FEBRUARY 2, 2023/MAGHA 13, 1944 (SAKA)
bl Hkkx esa fHkUu i`"B la[;k nh tkrh gS ftlls fd ;g vyx ladyu ds :i esa j[kk tk ldsA
Separate paging is given to this Part in order that it may be filed as a separate compilation.
MINISTRY OF LAW AND JUSTICE
(Legislative Department)
New Delhi, the 2nd February, 2023/Magha 13, 1944 (Saka)
The following Act of Parliament received the assent of the President on the
31st January, 2023 and is hereby published for general information:—
THE MARITIME ANTI-PIRACY ACT, 2022
NO. 3 OF 2023
[31st January, 2023.]
An Act to give effect to the United Nations Convention on the Law of the Sea
relating to repression of piracy on high seas and for matters connected
therewith or incidental thereto.
WHEREAS India is a party to the United Nations Convention on the Law of the Sea
adopted by the United Nations on the 10th December, 1982 and has ratified the same on the
29th June, 1995;
AND WHEREAS the aforesaid Convention, among other things, states that all States
shall co-operate to the fullest possible extent in the repression of piracy on high seas;
AND WHEREAS India, having ratified the said Convention, considers it necessary to
give effect to the aforesaid Convention relating to piracy.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Seventy-third Year of the Republic of India as
follows:—
1. (1) This Act may be called the Maritime Anti-Piracy Act, 2022. Short title,
commencement
and
application.
2 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [PART II—
(2) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by notification
in the Official Gazette, appoint.
(3) The provisions of this Act shall apply to the high seas.
Definitions. 2. (1) In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,—
(a) "authorised personnel" means the officers and sailors assigned to warships
or military aircraft of the Indian Navy or officers and enrolled persons of the Coast
Guard assigned to ships or aircraft of the Indian Coast Guard or officers of the Central
Government or the State Government authorised for any ship or aircraft clearly marked
and identifiable as being on Government service;
(b) "Code" means the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973; 2 of 1974.
(c) "Convention" means the United Nations Convention on the Law of the
Sea, 1982;
(d) "Designated Court" means a Court of Session specified as such under
section 8;
(e) "high seas" includes the Exclusive Economic Zone and all waters beyond the
jurisdiction of any other State.
Explanation.—For the purposes of this clause, "Exclusive Economic Zone"
means the Exclusive Economic Zone of any other State including the Exclusive
Economic Zone of India;
(f) "notification" means a notification published in the Official Gazette;
(g) "other State" means any country other than India;
(h) "piracy" means—
(i) any illegal act of violence or detention or any act of depredation
committed for private ends by any person or by the crew or any passenger of a
private ship and directed on the high seas against another ship or any person or
property on board such ship;
(ii) any act of voluntary participation in the operation of a ship with
knowledge of facts, making it a pirate ship;
(iii) any act of inciting or of intentionally facilitating an act described in
sub-clause (i) or sub-clause (ii); or
(iv) any act which is deemed piratical under the international law including
customary international law;
(i) "pirate ship" means a ship which—
(i) is intended by the person in dominant control to be used for the purposes
of committing any of the acts referred to in sub-clauses (i) to (iv) of clause (h); or
(ii) has been used to commit any such act, referred to in sub-clause (i) of
this clause, so long as it remains under the control of the person guilty of that act;
(j) "ship" means—
(i) vessel or water craft of every description, including non-displacement
craft;
(ii) sea planes and other aircraft,
used or capable of being used as means of transportation on water or engaged
in any operations at sea.
Explanation.—For the purposes of this clause, "aircraft" shall have the
same meaning as assigned to it in clause (1) of section 2 of the Aircraft Act, 1934; 22 of 1934.
(k) "stateless person" means a person who is not considered as a national by
any country by virtue of its laws.
(2) The words and expressions used in this Act and not defined but defined in the
Convention, the Indian Penal Code, the Code or the Territorial Waters, Continental Shelf, 45 of 1860.
SEC. 1] THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 3
80 of 1976. Exclusive Economic Zone and Other Maritime Zones Act, 1976, shall have the meanings
respectively assigned to them in such Convention, the Codes or the Act.
3. Whoever commits any act of piracy, shall be punished— Punishment
for piracy.
(i) with imprisonment which may extend to imprisonment for life or with fine or
with both; or
(ii) with death or with imprisonment for life, if such person in committing the act
of piracy causes death or an attempt thereof,
and in addition shall also be subject to restitution or forfeiture of property involved in the
commission of such offence.
4. Whoever attempts to commit the offence of piracy or aids or abets or conspires or Punishment
procures for the commission of such offence shall be punished with imprisonment for a term for attempt
to commit
which may extend to ten years or with fine or with both.
piracy, etc.
5. Whoever participates or organises or directs other person to participate in an act of Punishment
piracy shall be punished with imprisonment for a term which may extend to fourteen years or for organising
or directing
with fine or with both.
others to
participate in
an act of
piracy.
6. Notwithstanding anything contained in the Code, the Central Government may, for Conferment
the purposes of this Act, by notification, confer the powers of arrest, investigation and of power of
arrest,
prosecution of any person exercisable by a police officer under the Code on any of its officer
investigation,
or such officer of a State Government. etc.
7. (1) The authorised personnel may, either generally or on suspicion that a ship is Arrest of
persons and
engaged in piracy on the high seas, board such ship and arrest the persons or seize the pirate
seizure of ship
ship and property on board.
and property.
(2) The ship or property seized under sub-section (1) shall be disposed of only by the
order of the court.
8. For the purposes of providing speedy trial of offences under this Act, the Central Designated
Court.
Government shall, after consulting the Chief Justice of the concerned High Court, by
notification, specify—
(i) one or more Courts of Sessions in a State, to be the Designated Court for the
purposes of this Act; and
(ii) the territorial jurisdiction of each such court:
Provided that such territorial jurisdiction shall be determined on the basis of the
port or place of disembarkation within India of the person suspected or accused of an
offence under this Act.
9. The Designated Court shall have jurisdiction to try an offence punishable under Jurisdiction of
this Act where such offence is committed— Designated
Court.
(i) by a person who is apprehended by, or is in the custody of, the authorised
personnel or the police, regardless of the nationality or citizenship of such person;
(ii) by a person who is a citizen of India or a resident foreign national in India or
any stateless person:
Provided that nothing in this section shall apply to a warship or its auxiliary
ship or a Government owned ship employed for non-commercial service and is under
4 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [PART II—
the control of Government authorities at the time of commission of the offence of
piracy.
Trial of 10. (1) Notwithstanding anything contained in the Code,—
offences by
Designated (a) all offences under this Act shall be tried by the Designated Court notified as
Court.
such under clause (i) of section 8;
(b) where a person accused of, or suspected of, the commission of an offence
under this Act is forwarded to a Magistrate under sub-section (2) or sub-section (2A)
of section 167 of the Code, such Magistrate may authorise the detention of such
person in such custody, as he thinks fit, for a period not exceeding fifteen days in the
whole, where such Magistrate is a Judicial Magistrate, and seven days in the whole
where such Magistrate is an Executive Magistrate:
Provided that where such Magistrate considers—
(i) at the time when such person is forwarded to him under this
sub-section; or
(ii) at any time before the expiry of the period of detention authorised by
him,
that the detention of such person is not necessary, he shall order such person to be forwarded
to the Designated Court having jurisdiction.
(2) The Designated Court may exercise, in relation to the person forwarded to him
under clause (b) of sub-section (1), the same power which a Magistrate having jurisdiction
to try a case may exercise under section 167 of the Code, in relation to an accused person in
such case who has been forwarded to him under that section.
(3) A Designated Court may, upon a perusal of a complaint made by an officer of the
Central Government or the State Government, as the case may be, authorised in this behalf,
take cognizance of that offence without the accused being committed to it for trial.
(4) While trying an offence under this Act, a Designated Court may also try an offence
under any other law, other than an offence under this Act, with which the accused may be
charged at the same trial under the Code.
(5) Notwithstanding anything contained in the Code, a Designated Court shall, as far
as practicable, hold the trial on a day-to-day basis.
Presumption. 11. Where a person is accused of having committed an offence punishable under this
Act and, if,—
(a) the arms, ammunitions, explosives and other equipments are recovered from
the possession of the accused, and there are reasonable grounds to believe that such
arms, ammunitions, explosives or other equipments of similar nature were used or
intended to be used in the commission of the offence;
(b) there is evidence of use of force, threat of force or any other form of
intimidation caused to the crew or passengers of the ship in connection with the
commission of the offence; or
(c) there is evidence of an intended threat of using bombs, arms, firearms,
explosives or committing any form of violence against the crew, passengers or cargo of
a ship,
SEC. 1] THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 5
then, the Designated Court shall presume, unless the contrary is proved, that the accused
person had committed such offence.
12. (1) Notwithstanding anything contained in the Code, no person accused of an Provisions as
offence punishable under this Act shall, if in custody, be released on bail or on his own bond to bail.
unless—
(a) the Public Prosecutor has been given a reasonable opportunity to oppose
the application for such release; and
(b) where the Public Prosecutor opposes the application, the Court is satisfied
that there are reasonable grounds for believing that he is not guilty of such offence
and that he is not likely to commit any offence while on bail.
(2) Nothing contained in this section shall be deemed to affect the special powers of
the High Court regarding grant of bail under section 439 of the Code.
13. Save as otherwise provided in this Act, the provisions of the Code shall apply to Application
the proceedings before a Designated Court and the person conducting a prosecution before of Code in
proceedings
a Designated Court shall be deemed to be a Public Prosecutor appointed under the said
before
Code.
Designated
Court.
14. (1) The offences under this Act shall be deemed to have been included as extraditable Provision as
offences and provided for in all extradition treaties made by India with any other State and to extradition.
which extend to and are binding on India on the date of commencement of this Act.
(2) In the absence of a bilateral extradition treaty, the offences under this Act shall be
extraditable offences between India and other State on the basis of reciprocity.
34 of 1962. (3) For the purposes of application of the provisions of the Extradition Act, 1962 to the
offences under this Act, any ship registered in other State shall, at any time while that ship is
operating, be deemed to be within the jurisdiction of that other State whether or not it is for
the time being also within the jurisdiction of any other State.
15. (1) No suit, prosecution or other legal proceedings shall lie against an authorised Protection of
personnel for anything which is in good faith done or intended to be done in pursuance of action taken
in good faith.
the provisions of this Act.
(2) No suit or other legal proceeding shall lie against the Central Government or any
State Government for any damage caused or likely to be caused for anything which is in
good faith done or intended to be done in pursuance of the provisions of this Act.
————
DR. REETA VASISHTA,
Secretary to the Govt. of India.
UPLOADED BY THE MANAGER, GOVERNMENT OF INDIA PRESS, MINTO ROAD, NEW DELHI–110002
AND PUBLISHED BY THE CONTROLLER OF PUBLICATIONS, DELHI–110054.
MGIPMRND—2459GI(S3)—02.02.2023.
