jftLVªh lañ Mhñ ,yñ—¼,u½04@0007@2003—25 REGISTERED NO. DL—(N)04/0007/2003—25
सी.जी.-डी.xएxलx.G-अI.D-0H30x4x2x025-262248
CG-DL-E-03042025-262248
xxxGIDExxx
vlk/kkj.k
EXTRAORDINARY
Hkkx II — [k.M 1
PART II — Section 1
izkf/kdkj ls izdkf'kr
PUBLISHED BY AUTHORITY
lañ 11] ubZ fnYyh] c`gLifrokj] vizSy 3] 2025@pS= 13] 1947 ¼'kd½
No. 11] NEW DELHI, THURSDAY, APRIL 3, 2025/CHAITRA 13, 1947 (Saka)
bl Hkkx esa fHkUu i`"B la[;k nh tkrh gS ftlls fd ;g vyx ladyu ds :i esa j[kk tk ldsA
Separate paging is given to this Part in order that it may be filed as a separate compilation.
MINISTRY OF LAW AND JUSTICE
(Legislative Department)
New Delhi, the 3rd April, 2025/Chaitra 13, 1947 (Saka)
The following Act of Parliament received the assent of the President on the
3rd April, 2025 and is hereby published for general information:—
THE “TRIBHUVAN” SAHKARI UNIVERSITY ACT, 2025
No. 11 of 2025
[3rd April, 2025.]
An Act to establish the Institute of Rural Management Anand, as a
University to be known as the “Tribhuvan” Sahkari University and to
declare the same as an institution of national importance; to impart
technical and management education and training in co-operative
sector; to promote co-operative research and development and to attain
standards of global excellence therein in order to realise the vision of
“Sahkar Se Samriddhi” and to strengthen the co-operative movement
in the country through a network of institutions, and also to declare
the Institute as one of the Schools of the University and for matters
connected therewith or incidental thereto.
Be it enacted by Parliament in the Seventy-sixth Year of the Republic of India as
follows:—
CHAPTER I
Preliminary
1. (1) This Act may be called the “Tribhuvan” Sahkari University Act, 2025. Short title and
commencement.
(2) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by
notification in the Official Gazette, appoint:
2 THE GAZETTE OF IND2I(cid:3)A EXTRAORDINARY [Part II—
Provided that different dates may be appointed for different provisions of
this Act and any reference in any such provision to the commencement of this Act
shall be construed as a reference to the coming into force of that provision.
Declaration of 2.Whereas the objects of the “Tribhuvan” Sahkari University are such as to
“Tribhuvan” make it an institution of national importance, it is hereby declared that the
Sahkari University
“Tribhuvan” Sahkari University is an institution of national imoprtance.
as institution of
national
importance.
Definitions. 3.(1) In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,––
(a) “Academic and Research Council” means the Academic and
Research Council of the University;
(b) “academic staff” means such categories of staff designated as
academic staff by the Ordinances;
(c)“appointed day” means the date of establishment of the University
under sub-section (1) of section 4;
(d) “Assessment and Improvement Council” means the Assessment
and Improvement Council of the University;
(e) “Board for Affiliation and Recognition” means the Board for
Affiliation and Recognition of the University;
(f)“Board of Co-operative Studies” means the Board of Co-operative
Studies of a School of the University;
(g)“Capacity Building Council” means the Capacity Building Council
of the University;
(h)“Chancellor” means the Chancellor of the University;
(i) “co-operative principles” means the co-operative principles
provided in the First Schedule of the Multi-State Co-operative Societies
39 of 2002.
Act, 2002;
(j)“co-operative societies” means all co-operative societies registered
under Co-operative Societies Acts of the respective States, Union territories
with Legislature and without Legislature and the Multi-State Co-operative
39 of 2002.
Societies Act, 2002;
(k)“Dean” means the Head of a School or Head of an administrative
Department of the University;
(l)“Director” means the Director of the Institute of Rural Management
Anand School;
(m) “employee” means any person appointed by the University and
includes the teachers and other staff of the University;
(n) “Executive Board” means the Executive Board of the Institute of
Rural Management Anand School;
(o) “Executive Council” means the Executive Council of the
University;
(p) “Finance Committee” means the Finance Committee of the
University;
(q)“Fund” means the University Fund referred to in section 40;
(r)“Governing Board” means the Governing Board of the University;
(s)“hostel” means a unit of residence for the students of the University
orSchool, as the case may be;
(t) “Institute” means an academic institution including a college
admitted to or affiliated to the privileges of the University and the
expression “Institution” shall be construed accordingly;
Sec. 1] THE GAZETTE OF IND3I(cid:3)A EXTRAORDINARY 3
(u)“Institute of Rural Management Anand” means the Institute of Rural
Management Anand established and incorporated under the Societies
21 of 1860. Registration Act, 1860 and located in Anand, Gujarat;
(v) “Institute of Rural Management Anand School” means one of the
Schools of the University;
(w)“notification” means a notification published in the Official Gazette
and the expression “notified” with its cognate meanings and grammatical
variations shall be construed accordingly;
(x) “outlying campus” means the campus of the University as may be
established by it at any placein or outside India;
(y)“Registrar” means the Registrar of the University;
(z) “Research and Development Council” means the Research and
Development Council of the University;
(za) “Schedule” means the Schedulesappended to this Act;
(zb) “School” means a School established by the University in each
sector where degree, diploma and certificate are awarded by the University;
(zc) “Statutes”, “Ordinances” and “Regulations” mean respectively, the
Statutes, the Ordinances and the Regulations of the University made under this
Act;
(zd) “Teachers of the University” means the Professors, Associate
Professors, Assistant Professors and such other persons as may be appointed
for imparting instructions, training or conducting research in the University or
in any outlying campus maintained by the University;
(ze) ‘“Tribhuvan” Sahkari University’ means the “Tribhuvan” Sahkari
University established and incorporated as a University under this Act;
(zf) “University”means the “Tribhuvan” Sahkari University established
and incorporated as a University under this Act;
(zg) “Vice-Chancellor” means the Vice-Chancellor of the University.
(2)The words and expressions used herein and not defined, but defined in the
39 of 2002. Multi-StateCo-operativeSocietiesAct, 2002 shallhavethe respectivelymeanings
assigned to themin thatAct.
CHAPTERII
“TRIBHUVAN” SAHKARIUNIVERSITY
4. (1) With effect from such date as the Central Government may, by Establishment
notification, appoint, the Institute of Rural Management Anand shall be established and incorporation
of “Tribhuvan”
as a University to be known as the “Tribhuvan” Sahkari University, which shall be
Sahkari
a body corporate, having perpetual succession and a common seal, with power, University.
subject to the provisions of this Act, to acquire, hold property, both movable and
immovable, and to contract and shall, by the said name sue or be sued.
(2) The headquarters of the University shall be at Anand in the State of
Gujarat and the University may establish Schools or outlying campuses or affiliate
institutes at such other places in India as it may deem fit:
Provided that the University may, with the prior approval of the Central
Government, also establish or maintain outlying campuses or affiliate institutes
outside India.
4 THE GAZETTE OF IND4I(cid:3)A EXTRAORDINARY [Part II—
(3) The Chancellor, the Vice-Chancellor, the members of the Governing
Board, the Executive Council, the Academic and Research Council, the Capacity
Building Council, the Assessment and Improvement Council, the Research and
Development Council and other authorities shall constitute the University.
Effect of 5.(1) On and from the date of commencement of this Act,––
establishment of
University. (a) the Institute of Rural Management Anand registered as a society
under the Societies Registration Act, 1860 stands dissolved; 21 of 1860.
(b) any reference to the Institute of Rural Management Anand in any
contract or other instrument shall be deemed as a reference to the University;
(c) all property or assets, movable and immovable, of or belonging to
the Institute of Rural Management Anand shall vest in the University;
(d)all rights and liabilities oftheInstitute of Rural Management Anand
shall be transferred to, and be the rights and liabilities of the University;
(e) the identity and autonomy of the Institute of Rural Management
Anand School and its rights and privileges shall be continued:
Provided that the Institute of Rural Management Anand School so declared
under this Act shall have an Executive Board whichshall be responsible for ensuring
identity and autonomy of the School as granted under this section:
Provided further that the Institute of Rural Management Anand School shall
have a Director who shall be responsible to implement the decisions of the
Executive Board besides other regular responsibilities of the University.
(2)The Institute of Rural Management Anand School shall be declared as the
“Centre of Excellence”for Rural Management.
Explanation.––For the purposes of thissub-section, the expression “Centre of
Excellence” means the Institute of Rural Management Anand School to have greater
autonomy within the overall institutional framework of the University to achieve
excellence in its domain and also responsible for developing and spreading best
practices in imparting education, training and conducting research within the
University.
(3)Subject to the provisions of this Act, every person employed in the Institute
of Rural Management Anand immediately before the commencement of this Act
shall holdsuch employment in the University by the same tenure and on the same
terms and conditions and with the same rights and privileges as to pension and
gratuity as he would have held under the Institute of Rural Management Anand, if
this Act had not been enacted and such terms and conditions, rights and privileges
shall not be varied to his disadvantage:
Provided that the University shall be at liberty to place the services of the
persons permanently employed in the Institute of Rural Management Anand
immediately before the commencement of this Act to any area, field, department
and the like and at any place or location across India as deemed fit by the University
to further its objects.
(4) The identity and autonomy of any ongoing academic programme and
course of the Institute of Rural Management Anand School shall be preserved by
the University and any modification, if needed, shall be with the concurrence of the
Executive Board of such School.
(5) The Institute of Rural Management Anand School shall have
administrative and academic autonomy as may be providedby the Statutes.
Sec. 1] THE GAZETTE OF IND5I(cid:3)A EXTRAORDINARY 5
(6) The post-retirement benefits including medical benefits, if any, of every
academic staff, teacher and every other employee in the Institute of Rural
Management Anand who has superannuated before the commencement of this Act
shall be borne by the University in a manner and form as deemed fit and not to the
disadvantage of the superannuated employees.
(7) Any ongoing disciplinary proceedings against any permanent employees
in the Institute of Rural Management Anand at the time of the commencement of
this Act shall continue to be governed by the Institute of Rural Management Anand
Society Rules, 2004.
(8) Any matter governing the conditions of service relating to the teacher,
academic staff and every other employee for which no provision has been made in
this Act, shall be determined by the provisions to be made by the Executive Council.
6.The objects of the University shall be–– Objects of
University.
(i) to provide qualified and trained manpower to meet the present and
future needs of the co-operative sector by establishing its own Schools or
through affiliating institutes;
(ii)to provide training, education and capacity building to the employees
and board members of co-operative societies at all levels;
(iii)to act as an apex body to integrate, coordinate, and standardise the
academic and research activities of affiliated co-operative institutes and
training centres;
(iv) to standardise the course design and content, pedagogy, course
delivery in co-operative education and training in accordance with the national
and international best practices and the guiding principles specified in theFirst
Schedule to this Act;
(v)to develop centres of excellence in co-operative education, training,
research and consultancy;
(vi) to evolve as an institution of national and international repute for
advanced studies in the field of co-operative education and training, and any
other areas connected with co-operative societies;
(vii) to disseminate and advance knowledge by providing institutional
and research facilities in the field of co-operative education and training, and
to take appropriate measures for promoting innovations in teaching-learning
process and inter-disciplinary studies and research;
(viii) to establish Schools and affiliate institutes for imparting the
state-of-the-art education and training in the field of co-operation for all
sectors;
(ix)to provide distance learning or mass e-learning platform and courses
for serving the education and training needs of the co-operative societies;
(x) to undertake and promote research and development in all sectors
relating to co-operatives;
(xi) to promote innovation, entrepreneurship and start-ups in the
co-operative sector;
(xii)to establish and promote partnership and linkages with co-operative
societies or unions or federations at all levels, industry, Institutions,
Governments, International Co-operative Alliance and co-operative
educational institutions in India and abroad for furtherance of its objects;
(xiii)to discharge any other objects which the University deems fit to
undertake for the furtherance of its objects; and
6 THE GAZETTE OF IND6I(cid:3)A EXTRAORDINARY [Part II—
(xiv) to discharge such other objects, not inconsistent with the
provisions of this Act and the Statutes made thereunder, which the Central
Government may, by notification, specify in this behalf.
Powers and 7. (1) Subject to the provisions of this Act and the Statutes and Ordinances
functions of made thereunder, the University shall exercise and perform the following powers
University.
and functions, namely:––
(i) to plan, design, develop the required courses of study and conduct
appropriate academic and training programmes in the field of co-operation;
(ii)to grant, subject to such conditions as the University may determine,
diplomas or certificates to, and confer degrees or other academic distinctions
on, persons, on the basis of examinations, evaluation or any other method of
testing, and to withdraw any such certificates, diplomas, degrees or other
academic distinctions for good and sufficient cause;
(iii) to provide lectures and instructions for persons not enrolled as
regular students of the University and to grant certificates to them;
(iv) to establish and maintain such outlying campuses, entrepreneurial
incubation centres for new co-operative ventures, targeted skill development
centres or other units for research, instruction, and training as are, in the
opinion of the University, necessary for the furtherance of its objects;
(v) to establish and maintain Schools and hostels subject to assessment
of demand;
(vi) to provide nomenclature to the Institute of Rural Management
Anand School by Statutes made under this Act;
(vii)to confer honorary degrees or other distinctions;
(viii) to institute Professorships, Associate Professorships, Assistant
Professorships and other teaching or academic positions, required by the
University and to appoint persons to such Professorships, Associate
Professorships, Assistant Professorships or other teaching or academic
positions;
(ix) to appoint persons working in any University or academic
institution, including those located outside the country, as teachers of the
University;
(x) to create administrative, ministerial and other posts and to make
appointments thereto subject to availability of financial resources;
(xi) to co-operate or collaborate or associate with any other University
or authority or institution of higher learning, including those located outside
the country, in such manner and for such purposes as the University, may
determine;
(xii)to provide facilities through the distance education system;
(xiii) to institute and award fellowships, scholarships, studentships,
medals and prizes for raising academic standards and research;
(xiv) to organise and undertake extramural studies, training and
extension services;
(xv) to make provision for research and advisory services and for that
purpose, to enter into such arrangements with other institutions, co-operative
societies, industrial or other organisations, as the University may deem
necessary;
Sec. 1] THE GAZETTE OF IND7I(cid:3)A EXTRAORDINARY 7
(xvi) to organise and conduct refresher courses, workshops, seminars,
conferences, training of trainers, and other programmes for teachers,
evaluators, other academic staff and students;
(xvii) to appoint on contract or otherwise visiting Professors, Emeritus
Professors, Consultants and such other persons who may contribute to the
advancement of the objects of the University;
(xviii)to determine standards of admission to the University, which may
include examination, evaluation orany other method of testing;
(xix)to demand and receive payment of fees and other charges;
(xx) to demand and receive payment for undertaking projects and
consultancy services;
(xxi) to lay down conditions of service of all categories of employees,
including their code of conduct;
(xxii) to supervise, control, regulate and enforce discipline among the
students and the employees, and to take such disciplinary measures in this
regard as may be deemed fit by the University to be necessary;
(xxiii) to make arrangements for promoting the health and general
welfare of the employees and students;
(xxiv) to receive benefactions, donations and gifts and to acquire, hold
and manage movable or immovable, including trust and endowment
properties, for the purposes of the University;
(xxv)to dispose of any immovable property, with the previous approval
of the Central Government;
(xxvi)to borrow, with the previous approval of the Central Government,
on the security of the property of the University, money for the purposes of
the University;
(xxvii)to conduct innovative experiments and promote new methods and
technologies in the fields of co-operative management and other related fields;
(xxviii) to purchase or to take on lease any land or building or works
which may be necessary or convenient for the purposes of the University, on
such terms and conditions as it may deem fit and proper and to construct, alter
and maintain any such building or work;
(xxix) to start any new degree, allied course or research programme or
diploma or certification or training programme and discontinue any courses or
research programme or training programme without prejudice to the interest
of the students;
(xxx)to invest the funds of the University in or upon such securities and
transpose any investment from time to time in such manner as it may deem fit
in the interest of the University and as provided by the Statutes;
(xxxi) to act as an advisory body to the Government of India and other
National Institutions, State Governments and National Co-operative Societies
on all matters related to co-operative societies;
(xxxii) to grant affiliation to Institutes or to a particular course or
programmebeing conducted by any Institute in or outside India;
(xxxiii) to develop and certify teachers or practitioners as co-operative
trainers and resource persons;
8 THE GAZETTE OF IND8I(cid:3)A EXTRAORDINARY [Part II—
(xxxiv) to provide for the preparation of instructional and training
materials, including films, audio-visual materials, other software and the like;
(xxxv) to recognise persons for imparting instructions in any Institute
admitted or affiliated to the privileges of the University; and
(xxxvi) to do all such other acts and things as may be necessary,
incidental or conducive to the attainment of all or any of its objects.
(2)The University shall in the exercise of its powers have jurisdiction over the
outlying campuses.
(3) In exercising its powers referred to in sub-section (1), it shall be the
endeavour of the University to maintain an all-India character and high standards of
teaching, training and research, and the University may, among other measures
which may be necessary for the said purpose, take, in particular, the following
measures, namely:—
(i)admissions of students and recruitment of teachers shall be made on
all-India basis through appropriate procedures approved by the Executive
Council;
(ii) conduct self-financing, demand based, customised courses for the
co-operatives;
(iii)foreign students tobe admitted by the University to various courses
and programmes, as per the policy and schemes of the Government of India
and the procedure approved by the Executive Council;
(iv)inter-Universitymobilityof teacherswith portablepensionscheme
benefits, if any, and protection of seniority shall be encouraged.
Explanation.––For the purposes of this clause, the expression “portable
pension scheme” means a scheme to continue or carry forward the pension
scheme already subscribed by the incoming teacher;
(v) semester system, continuous evaluation and choice-based credit
system may be introduced and the University may enter into agreement with
other Universities and academic institutions for credit transfer and joint degree
programmes.
Explanation.––For the purposes of this clause, the expression “choice-based
credit system” means a criterion based grading system to assess student’s
achievement based on the learning goals for each programme, with continuous and
comprehensive evaluation instead of high stake examinations;
(vi) innovative courses and programmes of studies shall be introduced
with a provision for periodicreview and restructuring;
(vii) active participation of students shall be ensured in all academic
activities of the University, including evaluation of teachers;
(viii) accreditation may be obtained from the National Assessment and
Accreditation Council or any other accrediting agency of repute as may be
determined by the University; and
(ix)e-governanceshall beintroducedineverypossiblesphereof activity
with an effective management information system.
University to be 8.TheUniversityshallbe open topersons of anysexandof whatever caste,
open to all caste, creed, race or class, and it shall not be lawful for the University to adopt or impose
creed, race or
on any person, any test whatsoever of religious belief or profession in order to entitle
class.
such person to be appointed as a teacher of the University or to hold any other office
therein or to be admitted as a student in the University or to graduate there at or to
enjoy or exercise any privilege thereof:
Sec. 1] THE GAZETTE OF IND9I(cid:3)A EXTRAORDINARY 9
Provided that the University shall follow the policy of the Central Government
regarding reservations in admissions and employment.
9. (1) The Central Government may, from time to time, appoint one or more Power of Central
persons to review or inspect the work and progress of the University and outlying Government to
review and issue
campuses including its buildings, libraries, laboratories and equipments, and other
directions.
infrastructure maintained by it and also of the examinations, teaching and other work
conducted or done by the University, and to submit a report thereon and upon receipt of
that report, the Central Government may, take such action and issue such directions, as
it considers necessary, in respect of any of the matters dealt within the report and the
University shall abide by such action and be bound to comply with such directions.
(2) Without prejudice to the foregoing provisions of this section, the Central
Government may, by an order in writing, annul any proceeding of the University
which is not in conformity with the provisions of this Act or the Statutes or the
Ordinances made thereunder.
(3) Without prejudice to the provisions of this Act and the Statutes made
thereunder, the University, in discharge of its general powers and functions under
this Act, shall be bound by such directions as the Central Government may give in
writing to it from time to time.
(4) The Central Government shall have such other powers, in respect of the
affairs of the University, as may be provided by the Statutes.
10. (1) The Central Government may, by notification, appoint a person of Chancellor.
eminence as the Chancellor of the University.
(2)The Chancellor shall hold office for a term of five years or until he attains
the age of seventy years, whichever is earlier:
Provided that notwithstanding the expiry of his term of office, the Chancellor
shall continue to hold office until his successor enters upon his office.
(3) The terms and other conditions of service of Chancellor shall be such as
may be provided by the Statutes.
(4)The Chancellor shall, by virtue of his office, be the Head of the University
and shall, if present, preside at the Convocations of the University held for
conferring degrees and other ceremonial functions and also the meetings of the
Governing Board.
(5) The Chancellor shall exercise such other powers and perform such other
duties as may be assigned to him under this Act and the Statutes made thereunder.
CHAPTER III
OFFICERS OF UNIVERSITY AND INSTITUTEOF RURALMANAGEMENTANANDSCHOOL
11. The following shall be the officers of the University and the Institute of Officers of
University and
Rural Management Anand School, namely:—
Institute of Rural
(a)the Vice-Chancellor; Management
Anand School.
(b)the Director and ex officioDean of the Institute of Rural Management
Anand School;
(c)the Dean;
(d)the Registrar;
(e)the Finance Officer;
(f)the Controller of Examinations;
(g)the Librarian; and
(h) such other officers as may be provided by the Ordinances to be the
officers of the University and the Institute of Rural Management Anand
School.
10 THE GAZETTE OF IN1D0I(cid:3)A EXTRAORDINARY [Part II—
Vice-Chancellor. 12.(1) The Vice-Chancellor shall be a person having such eligibility criteria
and shall be appointed by the Central Government in such manner and subject to
such terms and conditions of service as may be provided by the Statutes:
Provided that the first Vice-Chancellor shall be appointed by the Central
Government in such manner and subject to such terms and conditions as may be
determined by it andheshall hold office for a term of three years and may be eligible
for re-appointment for another term of two years.
(2)The Vice-Chancellor shall be the principal executive and academic officer
of the University and shall exercise general supervision and control over other
officers of the University.
(3)The Vice-Chancellor may, if he is of the opinion that immediate action is
necessary on any matter, exercise any power conferred on any authority, except the
Governing Board of the University by or under this Act and shall inform such
authority at its next meeting the action taken by him on such matter.
(4) Where the Vice-Chancellor is of the opinion that any decision taken by
any officer or authority, other than Chancellor or the Governing Board of the
University is beyond the powers of such officer or authority conferred under the
provisions of this Act or the Statutes or the Ordinances made thereunder or that any
decision taken by the officer or authority is not as per the objectsof the University,
he shall have powers to rescind such decisions and issue appropriate directions and
all such matters shall be placed before the Governing Board for information.
(5) The Vice-Chancellor shall exercise such other powers and perform such
other duties as may be provided by the Statutes.
Registrar. 13. (1) The Registrar shall be appointed by the Central Government in such
manner, and on such terms and conditions, as may be provided by the Statutes:
Provided that the first Registrar shall be appointed by the Central Government
in such manner and on such terms and conditions as may be determined by it and
the said officer shall hold office for a term of three years, and may be eligible for
re-appointment for another term of two years.
(2) The Registrar shall have the power to enter into agreements, sign
documents and authenticate records on behalf of the University, and shall exercise
such other powers and perform such other duties, as may be provided by the
Statutes.
Finance Officer. 14.The Finance Officer shall be appointed by the Central Government in such
manner, and on such terms and conditions and shall exercise such powers and
perform such duties, as may be provided by the Statutes:
Provided that the first Finance Officer shall be appointed by the Central
Government in such manner and on suchterms and conditions as may be determined
by it and the said officer shall hold office for a term of three years, and may be
eligible for re-appointment for another term of two years.
Director of
15.(1) There shall be a Director and ex officio Dean of the Institute of Rural
Institute of Rural Management Anand School who shall be the principal academic and administrative
Management officer for that School, and shall exercise supervision and control over all employees
Anand School.
of that School.
(2) The Director shall be appointed in such manner, and on such terms and
conditions and shall exercise such powers and perform such duties, as may be
provided by the Ordinances.
Dean. 16.(1) Each School of the University shall be headed by a Dean who shall be
the principal academic and administrative officer for that School, and shall exercise
supervision and control over all employees of that School.
Sec. 1] THE GAZETTE OF IN1D1I(cid:3)A EXTRAORDINARY 11
(2)The Dean shall be appointed by the Executive Council in such manner, and
on such terms and conditions, and shall exercise such powers and perform such
duties, as may be provided by the Ordinances.
17.The Controller of Examinations shall be appointed insuch manner, and on Controller of
such terms and conditions, and shall exercise such powers and perform such duties, Examinations.
as may be provided by the Ordinances.
18. The Librarian shall be appointed in such manner, and on such terms and Librarian.
conditions, and shall exercise such powers and perform such duties, as may be
provided by the Ordinances.
19.(1) In addition to the officers referred to in clauses (a) to (g) of section 11, Other officers.
the University shall consist of such other officers as may be provided by the
Ordinances.
(2)The manner of appointment, terms and conditions of service and powers
and duties of other officers of the University shall be such as may be provided by
the Ordinances.
CHAPTER IV
AUTHORITIES OF UNIVERSITY AND INSTITUTE OFRURALMANAGEMENTANANDSCHOOL
20. The following shall be the authorities of the University and Institute of Authorities of
Rural Management Anand School, namely:— University and
Institute of Rural
(a)the Governing Board; Management
Anand School.
(b)the Executive Council;
(c)the Academic and Research Council;
(d)the Executive Board;
(e)the Capacity Building Council;
(f)the Assessment and Improvement Council;
(g)the Research and Development Council;
(h)the Board for Affiliation and Recognition;
(i)the Finance Committee;
(j)the Board of Co-operative Studies; and
(k) such other authorities as may be provided by the Ordinances to be
the authorities of the University and Institute of Rural Management Anand
School.
21.(1) The Chancellor shall be the Chairperson of the Governing Board. Governing
Board.
(2) In addition to the Chairperson, the Governing Board shall consist of the
following members who shall be nominated by the Central Government, namely:—
(a) Vice-Chancellor—Member, ex officio;
(b) Secretary, Ministry of Cooperation—Member, ex officio;
(c) Four Secretaries of Central Ministries or Departments dealing with
important sectors of co-operative—Members, ex officio;
(d)Four Principal Secretaries or Secretaries of Co-operation Department
of States or Union territories, by rotation—Members, ex officio;
(e) Managing Director, National Co-operative Development
Corporation—Member, ex officio;
(f)Chairperson, National Dairy Development Board—Member, ex officio;
12 THE GAZETTE OF IN1D2I(cid:3)A EXTRAORDINARY [Part II—
(g)Chief Executive, National Fisheries Development Board—Member,
ex officio;
(h) Chairperson, National Bank for Agriculture and Rural
Development—Member, ex officio;
(i)Four Chairpersons of National Co-operative Societies, by rotation—
Members, ex officio;
(j) Chairperson, Institute of Rural Management Anand School—Member,
ex officio;
(k) Four Deans of Schools and Departments established by the
University, by rotation—Members, ex officio;
(l)Two Directors of Institutes affiliated to the University, by rotation—
Members, ex officio;
(m) Four Professors who are members of the Academic and Research
Council, Capacity Building Council, Assessment and Improvement Council
and Researchand Development Council respectively, by rotation—Members,
ex officio;
(n)Finance Officer of the University—Member, ex officio;
(o)President, Alumni Association—Member, ex officio;
(p)Four eminent persons in the field of co-operatives—Members;
(q)Representative of the Reserve Bank, not below the rank of Executive
Director—Member, ex officio; and
(r)the Registrar—Member-Secretary,ex officio.
(3) The term of office of the nominated members, other than ex officio
Members shall be for a period of three years from the date of their nomination:
Provided that term of office of an ex officioMember shall continue so long as
he holds the office by virtue of which he is a member.
(4)Subject to the provisions of this Actand the statutes made thereunder, the
Governing Board shall exercise and perform the following powers and functions,
namely:—
(a)to review, from time to time, the broad policies and programmes of
the University, and to suggest measures for the improvement and development
of the University;
(b)to consider and pass resolutions on the annual report and the annual
accounts of the University and the audit report on such accounts;
(c)to nominate members of Academic and Research Council, Capacity
Building Council, Assessment and Improvement Council, Research and
Development Council and Board for Affiliation and Recognition; and
(d) to perform such other powers and functions as may be provided by
the Statutes.
Executive 22. (1) The Vice-Chancellor shall be the ex officio Chairperson of the
Council. Executive Council, which shall be the principal executive body of the University
and shall exercise supervision and control over all authorities of the University
referred to in clauses (c) to (k) of section 20.
(2)The constitution of the Executive Council, the term of office of its members
and its powers and functions shall be such as may be provided by the Statutes.
Academic and 23. (1) The Vice-Chancellor shall be the ex officio Chairperson of the
Research Academic and Research Council, which shall be theprincipal academic and research
Council.
body of the University and shall, subject to the provisions of this Act, the Statutes
and the Ordinances made thereunder, co-ordinate and exercise general supervision
over the academic and research policies of the University.
Sec. 1] THE GAZETTE OF IN1D3I(cid:3)A EXTRAORDINARY 13
(2)The constitution of the Academic and Research Council, the term of office
of its members and its powers and functions shall be such as may be provided by
the Ordinances.
24.(1) Subject to the provisions of this Act and the Statutes made thereunder, Executive Board
there shall be an Executive Board of the Institute of Rural Management Anand of Institute of
Rural
School which shall, co-ordinate and exercise general supervision oversuch School.
Management
(2)The constitution of the Executive Board,selection of its Chairperson, the Anand School.
term of office of its Chairperson and members and its powers and functions shall be
such as may be provided by the Statutes.
25.(1) The Vice-Chancellor shall be the ex officioChairperson of the Capacity Capacity
Building Council, which shall be the principal body of the University for capacity Building
Council.
building programmes and shall, subject to the provisions of this Act, the Statutes
and the Ordinances made thereunder, co-ordinate and exercise general supervision
over the capacity building policies of the University.
(2)The constitution of the Capacity Building Council, the term of office of its
members and its powers and functions shall be such as may be provided by the
Ordinances.
26. (1) The Vice-Chancellor shall be the ex officio Chairperson of the Assessment and
Assessment and Improvement Council, which shall be the principal body of the Improvement
Council.
University for assessment and improvement of all programmes and shall, subject to
the provisions of this Act, the Statutes and the Ordinances made thereunder,
co-ordinate and exercise general supervision over the matters relating to assessment
and improvement of such programmes.
(2)The constitution of the Assessment and Improvement Council, the term of
office of its members and its powers and functions shall be such as may be provided
by the Ordinances.
27.(1) The Vice-Chancellor shall be the ex officioChairperson of the Research Research and
Development
and Development Council, which shall be the principal body of the University for
Council.
undertaking and promoting research and development activities in all sectors
relating to co-operatives and shall,subject to the provisions of this Act, the Statutes
and the Ordinances made thereunder, co-ordinate and exercise general supervision
over the matters relating to research and development.
(2) The constitution of the Research and Development Council, the term of
office of its members and its powers and functions shall be such as may be provided
by the Ordinances.
28. (1) The Vice-Chancellor shall be the ex officio Chairperson of the Board Board for
for Affiliation and Recognition, which shall be responsible for admitting or Affiliation and
Recognition.
affiliating institutes to the privileges of the University.
(2)The constitution of the Board for Affiliation and Recognition, the term of
office of its members and its powers and functions shall be such as may be provided
by the Ordinances.
29.(1) The Vice-Chancellor shall be the ex officioChairperson of the Finance Finance
Committee. Committee.
(2) The constitution of the Finance Committee, the term of office of its
members and its powers and functions shall be such as may be provided by the
Ordinances.
30.(1) Every School shall have a Board of Co-operative Studies. Board of
Co-operative
(2) The constitution of the Board of Co-operative Studies, the term of office Studies.
of its members and its powers and functions shall be such as may be provided by
the Ordinances.
14 THE GAZETTE OF IN1D4I(cid:3)A EXTRAORDINARY [Part II—
(3)The Board of Co-operative Studies shall have such number of Committees
not exceeding five, including three Committees, comprising of experts, dealing in
streams of degree, diploma and certificate,respectively.
(4) The constitution, powers and functions of the Committees referred to in
sub-section (3) shall be such as may be provided by the Ordinances.
Other 31. The manner of appointment, terms and conditions, powers and functions
authorities of of other authorities referred to in clause (k) of section 20 shall be such as may be
University.
provided by the Ordinances.
Meetings of 32. (1) The authorities except the Governing Board and Executive Council
authorities.
shall meet at such places and times, and shall follow such rules of procedure in
regard to the transaction of the business at its meetings (including quorum), as may
be provided by the Ordinances.
(2) If the Chairperson of any authority, for any reason is unable to attend a
meeting of such authority, any other member chosen by the members present
amongst themselves at the meeting, shall presideoverthe meeting.
CHAPTER V
STATUTES, ORDINANCES AND REGULATIONS
Statutes. 33. Subject to the provisions of this Act, the Statutes may provide for all or
any of the following matters, namely:—
(a) the constitution of the Governing Board, Executive Council and
Executive Board, as may be constituted from time to time, and their powers
and functions;
(b) the appointment and continuance in office of the members of the
Governing Board, Executive Council and Executive Board, the filling up of
vacancies of members, and all other matters relating to these authorities;
(c) the nomenclature of the Institute of Rural Management Anand
School so declared under this Act;
(d)the terms and conditions relating to clause (iv) of sub-section (3) of
section 7, subject to any provision relating to transfer of teachers from the
University to other Central University or Centrally Funded Technical
Institutes to be decided in consultation with concerned Central Government
Departments; and
(e)all other matters which by this Act are to be, or may be, provided for
by the Statutes.
Power to make 34. (1) The first Statutes as specified in the Second Schedule shall be
Statutes.
continued till they are superseded by new Statutes.
(2)The new or additional Statutes shall be made by the Central Government
eithersuo motuor on the recommendation of the Executive Council, at any point of
time and as deemed fit.
Ordinances. 35.Subject to the provisions of this Act and the Statutes made thereunder, the
Ordinances may provide for all or any of the following matters, namely:—
(a) the constitution, powers and functions of all authorities except
Governing Board, Executive Council and Executive Board, as may be
constituted from time to time;
(b)the appointment and continuance in office of the members of the said
authorities and other bodies, the filling up of vacancies of members, and all
other matters relating to those authorities and other bodies for which it may be
necessary or desirable to provide;
Sec. 1] THE GAZETTE OF IN1D5I(cid:3)A EXTRAORDINARY 15
(c) the appointment, powers and duties, emoluments and terms and
conditions of service of officers of the University and the Institute of Rural
Management Anand School except Vice-Chancellor, Registrar and Finance
Officer;
(d)the appointment of teachers, academic staff and other employees of
the University and the Institute of Rural Management Anand School, their
emoluments and terms and conditions of their service;
(e)the appointment of teachers and academic staff working in any other
University or organisation for a specific period for undertaking a joint project;
(f)theterms and conditions of service of employees including provisions
for pension, insurance, provident fund, the manner of termination of service
and disciplinary action;
(g)the principles governing the seniority of service of the employees of
the University;
(h)the procedure for arbitration in cases of dispute between employees
or students and the University;
(i) the procedure for appeal to the Executive Council by any employee
or student against the action of any officer or authority of the University;
(j)the conferment of affiliation to institutes;
(k)the establishment and closure of Schools, Departmentsandhostels;
(l)the conferment of honorary degrees;
(m)the conferment and withdrawal of degrees, diplomas, certificates and
other academic distinctions;
(n) the management of Schools established and maintained by the
University;
(o) the delegation of powers vested in the authorities or officers of the
Universityand the Institute of Rural Management Anand School;
(p)the maintenance of discipline among the employees and students;
(q) the admission of students to the University and their enrolment as
such;
(r)the courses of study and their duration to be laid down for all degrees,
diplomas and certificates of the University;
(s)the medium of instructionsand examinations;
(t) the award of degrees, diplomas, certificates and other academic
distinctions, the qualifications for the same and the means to be taken relating
to the granting and obtaining of the same;
(u)the fees to be charged for courses of study in the University and for
admission to examinations, degrees and diplomas of the University;
(v) the conditions for award of fellowships, scholarships, studentships,
medals and prizes;
(w)the conduct of examinations, including the term of office and manner
of appointment and the duties of examining bodies, examiners and
moderators;
(x)the conditions of residence of the students of the University;
(y) the special arrangements, if any, which may be made for the
residence and teaching of women students and prescribing special courses of
studies for them;
16 THE GAZETTE OF IN1D6I(cid:3)A EXTRAORDINARY [Part II—
(z) the establishment of Centres of Studies, Board of Studies and other
Committees;
(za) the manner of co-operation and collaboration with other
Universities, institutions and other organisations including industry;
(zb) the creation, composition and functions of any other body which is
considered necessary for improving the academic life of the University;
(zc) the setting up of a machinery for redressal of grievances of
employees and students; and
(zd) any other matter which, by this Act or the Statutes made thereunder,
is to be or may be, provided for by the Ordinances.
Power to make 36. (1) The first Ordinances shall be made by the Vice-Chancellor and the
Ordinances. Ordinances so made may be amended or repealed at any time by the Executive
Council.
(2)Save as otherwise provided in sub-section (1), the Executive Council shall
make Ordinanceseithersuo motuor on the recommendation of the related authority
of the University referred to in clauses (c) to (k) of section 20, as decided by such
Executive Council.
(3) Every Ordinance so made under sub-sections (1) and (2) shall be
submitted, as soon as may be after it is made, to the Central Government for
information.
Regulations. 37.Any authority under section 20 may make Regulation, consistent with the
provisions of this Act, the Statutes and the Ordinances made thereunder, for the
conduct of its own business and every Regulation so made shall be submitted, as
soon as may be after it is made, to the Executive Council for information.
CHAPTER VI
ACCOUNTS AND AUDIT
Annual report. 38. (1) The annual report of the University shall be prepared under the
directions of Executive Council, which shall include, among other matters, the steps
taken by the University towards the fulfilment of its objects and shall be submitted
to the Governing Board after the approval of Executive Council within six months
from the closing of financial year and theGoverning Board shall consider the report
in its annual meeting.
(2) The Governing Board shall submit the annual report to the Central
Government along with its comments, if any, on or before the expiry of nine months
from the closing of financial year.
(3)The Central Government shall, as soon as may be after it is received, cause
a copy of the annual report to be laid before each House of Parliament.
Annual 39. (1) The University shall maintain proper accounts and other relevant
accounts. records and prepare an annual statement of accounts, including the balance-sheet,
in such form and accounting standardsas may be provided by it in consultation with
the Comptroller and Auditor-General of India.
(2) The accounts of the University shall be audited by the Comptroller and
Auditor-General of India and any expenditure incurred by it in connection with such audit
shall be payable by the University to the Comptroller and Auditor-General of India.
(3) The Comptroller and Auditor-General of India and any person appointed
by him in connection with the audit of the accounts of the University shall have the
same rights, privileges and authority in connection with such audit as the
Comptroller and Auditor-General of India has in connection with the audit of the
Government accounts, and, in particular, shall have the right to demand the
production of books, accounts, connected vouchers and other documents and papers
and to inspect the offices of the University.
Sec. 1] THE GAZETTE OF IN1D7I(cid:3)A EXTRAORDINARY 17
(4) The accounts of the University as certified by the Comptroller and
Auditor-General of India or any other person appointed by him in this behalf together
with the audit report thereon shall be forwarded annually to the Central Government
on or before the expiry of nine months from the closing of financial year and that
Government shall cause the same to be laid before each House of Parliament.
40.(1) There shall be a University Fund which shall include–– Fund of
University.
(a)any contribution or grant made by the Central Government;
(b) grant from Co-operative Education Fund maintained under the
39 of 2002. Multi-State Co-operative Societies Act, 2002 or States’ or Union Territories’
Co-operative Societies Acts;
(c) grant from corpus Fund for Co-operative Training set up by the
Central Government;
(d)any contribution or grant made by the State Government;
(e) any contribution made by Government, semi-Government or
autonomous bodies;
(f)any gifts, bequests, donations, endowments or other grants;
(g)income received by the University from fees and charges;
(h) income received by the University from undertaking projects and
consultancy services;
(i) money received by the University from the collaborating industries,
co-operative societies, federations, unions and other organisations in terms of
the provisions of the Memorandum of Understanding between the University
and such collaborating industry, co-operative society, federation, union or
other organisation; and
(j) money received from any other source, provided that any funding
fromforeign sources shall require prior approval of the Central Government.
(2)All funds of the University shall be deposited in such banks or invested in
such manner as the Executive Council may decide on the recommendation of the
Finance Committee.
(3)Thefunds of the University shall be applied towardsmeetingthe expenses
of the University including expenses incurred in the exercise of its powers and
discharge of its functions by or under this Act.
(4)The University, at all times, shall strive to be self-sufficient in meeting its
expenses and shall, while launching new courses or programmes, establishing new
schools or other infrastructure, creating or filling posts, incurring recurring or
non-recurring expenses and creating any other financial liability, take into account
financial resources that are either available with the University or tied up with
stakeholders or any other source.
CHAPTER VII
MISCELLANEOUS
41. (1) Every employee of the University shall be appointed under a written Conditions of
contract, which shall be lodged with the University and a copy of which shall be service of
employees, etc.
furnished to the employee concerned.
(2) Any dispute arising out of the contract between the University and any
employee shall, at the request of the employee, be referred to a Dispute Resolution
Body consisting of one member appointed by the Executive Council, one member
nominated by the employee concerned and an independent member from outside
the University to be appointed by the Executive Council.
18 THE GAZETTE OF IN1D8I(cid:3)A EXTRAORDINARY [Part II—
(3)The decision of the Dispute Resolution Body shall be final and no suit shall
lie in any civil court in respect of the matters decided by the Dispute Resolution
Body.
(4)Every request made by the employee under sub-section (2) shall be deemed
to be a submission to arbitration upon the terms of this section within the meaning
of the Arbitration and Conciliation Act, 1996. 26 of 1996.
(5) The procedure for regulating the work of the Dispute Resolution Body
shall be such as may be provided by the Ordinances.
Right to appeal. 42. (1) Any person including an employee or a student of the University
aggrieved by the decision or order of the Academic and Research Council, the
Capacity Building Council, the Assessment and Improvement Council, the Research
and Development Council, the Board for Affiliation and Recognition and the Board
of Co-operative Studies may file an appeal to the Executive Council.
(2) The form, manner and the procedure for filing and disposing of appeal
referred to in sub-section (1) shall be such as may be provided by the Ordinances.
Provident and 43. (1) The University shall constitute for benefit of its employees such
pension funds. provident fund or any other similar fund or provide such insurance schemes, as it
may deem fit, in such manner and subject to such conditions, as may be provided
by the Ordinances.
(2)Where such provident fund or other similar fund has been so constituted,
the Central Government may declare that the provisions of the Provident Funds
Act, 1925 shall apply to such fund, as if it were a Government provident fund. 19 of 1925.
Returns and 44. The University shall furnish to the Central Government such returns or
information. other information with respect to its property or activities, within such period, as
may be determined by the Central Government from time to time.
Acts and 45. No act or proceedings of any authority or other body of the University
proceedingsnot shall be invalid merely by reason of the existence of a vacancy or vacancies among
invalidated by
its members.
vacancies.
University and 46. The provisions of the Right to Information Act, 2005 shall apply to the 20 of 2005.
Institute of Rural
University and the Institute of Rural Management Anand School, as if it were a
Management
Anand School to public authority defined in clause (h) of section 2 of that Act.
be public authority
under Right to
Information Act.
Protection of 47.No suit,prosecutionor other legal proceedings shall lie against any officer
action taken in or other employee of the University for anything which is in good faith done or
good faith.
intended to be done in pursuance of any of the provisions of this Act, the Statutes or
the Ordinancesmade thereunder.
Act to have 48.Save as otherwise provided, the provisions of this Act shall be in addition
overriding effect. to and not in derogation of the University Grants Commission Act, 1956 and any 3 of 1956.
other law for the time being in force.
Mode of proof of 49. Notwithstanding anything contained in the Bharatiya Sakshya
University record. Adhiniyam, 2023 or in any other law for the time being in force, a copy of any 47 of 2023.
receipt, application, notice, order, proceeding or resolution of any authority or other
body of the University, or any other document in possession of the University, or
any entry in any register duly maintained by the University, if certified by the
Registrar, shall be received as prima facie evidence of such receipt, application,
notice, order, proceeding, resolution or document or the existence of entry in the
register and shall be admitted as evidence of the matters and transactions therein
where the original thereof would, if produced, have been admissible in evidence.
Statutes to be laid 50. (1) Every Statute made under this Act shall be published in the Official
before Parliament.
Gazette.
Sec. 1] THE GAZETTE OF IN1D9I(cid:3)A EXTRAORDINARY 19
(2)Every Statute made under this Act, shall be laid, as soon as may be after it
is made, before each House of Parliament, while it is in session, for a total period of
thirty days which may be comprised in one session or in two or more successive
sessions, and if, before the expiry of the session immediately following the session
or the successive sessions aforesaid, both Houses agree in making any modification
in the Statute or both Houses agree that the Statute should not be made, the Statute
shall thereafter have effect only in such modified form or be of no effect, as the case
may be; so, however, that any such modification or annulment shall be without
prejudice to the validity of anything previously done under that Statute.
(3)The power to make Statutes shall include the power to give retrospective
effect, from a date not earlier than the date of commencement of this Act, to the
Statutes but no retrospective effect shall be given to any Statutes so as to
prejudicially affect the interests of any person to whom such Statutes may be
applicable.
51. (1) The Central Government shall have the authority to deal with any Residuary
matter pertaining to the University and the Institute of Rural Management Anand provision.
School and not specifically dealt with in this Act.
(2)The decision of the Central Government on all such matters shall be final.
52.(1) If any difficulty arises in giving effect to the provisions of this Act, the Power to remove
Central Government may, by order published in the Official Gazette, make such difficulties.
provisions, not inconsistent with the provisions of this Act, as may appear to it to be
necessary or expedient for removing the difficulty:
Provided that no such order shall be made under this section after the expiry
of three years from the date of commencement of this Act.
(2)Every order made underthis sectionshall be laid, as soon as may be after
it is made, before each House of Parliament.
53. Notwithstanding anything contained in this Act and the Statutes made Transitional
thereunder,–– provisions.
(a)the Board of Governors and other committees functioning in Institute
of Rural Management Anand shall continue to function till such time the
authorities or committees are constituted in the University under the
provisions of this Act;
(b) the existing officers of Institute of Rural Management Anand shall
continue to function till such time, the officers of the University are appointed
under the provisions of this Act; and
(c) till the First Statutes and Ordinances are made, any matter
not specifically dealt within this Act shall be governed by rules and
regulations of Institute of Rural Management Anand.
20 THE GAZETTE OF IN2D0I(cid:3)A EXTRAORDINARY [Part II—
THE FIRST SCHEDULE
[Seesection 6(iv)]
GUIDING PRINCIPLES FOR COURSE DESIGN, PEDAGOGY AND DELIVERY
1. To create an enabling ecosystem to realise the vision of “Sahkar Se
Samriddhi” by providing a stable pool of appropriately trained manpower for the
co-operative sector.
2.To meet education and training needs of members of boards of directors and
employees of co-operative societies in all sectors, all regions and at all levels, that
is National, State, District or Primary.
3.To design courses for all levels or streams of employees, that is managerial,
supervisory, technical, administrative and the like.
4. To take into account the needs of students coming from different
educational levels and backgrounds.
5. To design foundational courses such as co-operative principles, laws,
taxation, accounting, audit, history, culture, best international and national practices
and the like.
6.To design domain specific courses for sectoral co-operative societies (Milk,
Fisheries, Sugar, Credit, Urban Co-operative Banks, Agri-business, Housing,
Marketing and the like).
7.To design co-operative management courses including Finance, Marketing,
Human Resources, Information System, Logistics, Storage and Inventory
Management.
8.To design course content to enhance professionalism and use of Information
Technology in co-operative sector.
9. To address the need for building, refreshing and enhancing skills in the
co-operative sector.
10.To design courses in close coordination with the co-operative societies to
ensure development of need based, contemporary, dynamic and responsive
curriculum.
11. To take into account the latest developments in course design, pedagogy
and content delivery using multimedia and other technological tools.
12.To meet the specific requirement of the National Co-operative Societies,
State Co-operative Societies and Co-operative Federations.
13.To address the specialised needs for engineering and technological courses
in co-operative sector (milk processing technology, weaving, spinning technology,
storage and logistics technology, information technology, Enterprise Resource
Planning and the like).
14. To include latest technological developments in the courses for each
sector.
15.To address the emerging needs and technological areas such as Artificial
Intelligence, Machine Learning and the like.
20
Sec. 1] THE GAZETTE OF IN(cid:3) 2D1I(cid:3)A EXTRAORDINARY 21
THE SECOND SCHEDULE
(Seesection 34)
THEFIRSTSTATUTES
The University, in the exercise of its powers and functions under section 7,
shall ensure that the financial liabilities are met out of the available financial
resources and to that extent shall devise and enforce such procedures as approved
by any authority referred to in section 20:
Provided that the extant rules and procedures of the Central Government
relating to appointments, promotions and fixation of pay as well as expenditures,
both recurring and non-recurring, including those referred to in clauses (viii), (x),
(xvii) and clause (xxi) of sub-section (1) of section 7, shall apply if the University
seeks any financial assistance or Gross Budgetary Support apart from one time
capital grant.
———
The above Bill has been passed by the Houses of Parliament.
DR. RAJIV MANI,
Secretary to the Govt. of India.
Dated the Chairman.
—————
I assent to this Bill.
Dated the President.
UPLOADED BY THE MANAGER, GOVERNMENT OF INDIA PRESS, MINTO ROAD, NEW DELHI–110002
AND PUBLISHED BY THE CONTROLLER OF PUBLICATIONS, DELHI–110054.
21
MGIPMRND—1GI(S4)—3-4-2025.
