jftLVªh lañ Mhñ ,yñ—(,u)04@0007@2003—23 REGISTERED NO. DL—(N)04/0007/2003—23
सससीीी...जजजीीी...---डडडीीीx...एएएxलललx...G---अअअID...---111H222000x222x222x000222444---222555222000000888
CCCGGG---DDDLLL---EEE---111222000222222000222444---222555222000000888
xxxGIDExxx
vlk/kkj.k
EXTRAORDINARY
Hkkx II — [k.M 1
PART II—Section 1
izkf/kdkj ls izdkf'kr
PUBLISHED BY AUTHORITY
lañ 2] ubZ fnYyh] lkseokj] Qjojh 12] 2024@ek?k 23] 1945 ¼'kd½
No. 2] NEW DELHI, MONDAY, FEBRUARY 12, 2024/MAGHA 23, 1945 (SAKA)
bl Hkkx esa fHkUu i`"B la[;k nh tkrh gS ftlls fd ;g vyx ladyu ds :i esa j[kk tk ldsA
Separate paging is given to this Part in order that it may be filed as a separate compilation.
MINISTRY OF LAW AND JUSTICE
(Legislative Department)
New Delhi, the 12th February, 2024/Magha 23, 1945 (Saka)
The following Act of Parliament received the assent of the President on the
12th February, 2024 and is hereby published for general information:—
THE JAMMU AND KASHMIR LOCAL BODIES LAWS (AMENDMENT)
ACT, 2024
(NO. 2 OF 2024)
[12th February, 2024.]
An Act further to amend the Jammu and Kashmir Panchayati Raj Act, 1989
(IX of 1989), the Jammu and Kashmir Municipal Act, 2000 (XX of 2000) and
the Jammu and Kashmir Municipal Corporation Act, 2000 (XXI of 2000).
WHEREAS the Legislative Assembly of the Union territory of Jammu and Kashmir is
not in existence and proclamation made by the Government of India vide number S.O. 3937 (E),
dated the 31st October, 2019, in terms of section 73 of the Jammu and Kashmir Reorganisation
34 of 2019. Act, 2019 is in force;
AND WHEREAS in terms of the aforesaid Proclamation, the powers of the Legislature of
the Union territory of Jammu and Kashmir shall be exercisable by or under the authority of
Parliament.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Seventy-fifth Year of the Republic of India as
follows:—
CHAPTER I
PRELIMINARY
1. (1) This Act may be called the Jammu and Kashmir Local Bodies Laws (Amendment) Short title and
Act, 2024. commencement.
(2) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by notification
in the Official Gazette, appoint.
2 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [Part II—
2
CHAPTER II
AMENDMENTS TO THE JAMMU AND KASHMIR PANCHAYATI RAJ ACT, 1989
Amendment of 2. In section 2 of the Jammu and Kashmir Panchayati Raj Act, 1989 (hereafter Jammu and
section 2. in this Chapter referred to as the Panchayati Raj Act), in sub-section (1), after Kashmir Act
IX of 1989.
clause (l), the following clause shall be inserted, namely:––
‘(la) “Other Backward Classes” means the Other Backward Classes
declared by the Government of the Union territory of Jammu and Kashmir
from time to time in accordance with sub-clause (iii) of clause (o) of section 2
of the Jammu and Kashmir Reservation Act, 2004;’. Jammu and
Kashmir Act
Substitution of 3. For section 2A of the Panchayati Raj Act, the following section shall be XIV of 2004.
section 2A.
substituted, namely:––
Construction of ‘2A. Throughout the Act, for the words “District Planning and
reference of
Development Board” and “District Panchayat Officer” wherever they occur,
certain
expressions by the words “the District Development Council” and “Assistant Commissioner of
certain other Panchayat” shall respectively be substituted.’.
expressions.
Amendment of 4. In section 4 of the Panchayati Raj Act, in sub-section (3),––
section 4.
(a) in the first proviso,––
(i) in clause (a), the word “and” occurring at the end shall be
omitted;
(ii) for clause (b), the following clauses shall be substituted,
namely:––
“(b) the Scheduled Tribes; and
(c) the Other Backward Classes,”;
(iii) in the long line, after the words “or of the Scheduled Tribes
in that Panchayat area”, the words “or of the Other Backward Classes
in that Panchayat area” shall be inserted;
(b) in the second proviso,––
(i) in clause (a), for the words “or, as the case may be, the
Scheduled Tribes,”, the words “or the Scheduled Tribes or the Other
Backward Classes, as the case may be,” shall be substituted;
(ii) in clause (b), for the words “and the Scheduled Tribes”, the
words “the Scheduled Tribes and the Other Backward Classes” shall
be substituted.
Amendment of 5. In section 27 of the Panchayati Raj Act, in sub-section (3),––
section 27.
(a) in the first proviso,––
(i) in clause (a), the word “and” occurring at the end shall be
omitted;
(ii) for clause (b), the following clauses shall be substituted,
namely:—
“(b) the Scheduled Tribes; and
(c) the Other Backward Classes,”;
(iii) in the long line, after the words “or of the Scheduled Tribes
in that district”, the words “or of the Other Backward Classes in that
district” shall be inserted;
[Sec. 1 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA3 EXTRAORDINARY 3
(b) in the second proviso,––
(i) in clause (a), for the words “or, as the case may be, the
scheduled tribes,”, the words “or the Scheduled Tribes or the Other
Backward Classes, as the case may be,” shall be substituted;
(ii) in clause (b), for the words “or the Scheduled Tribes”, the
words “or the Scheduled Tribes or the Other Backward Classes” shall
be substituted.
6. In section 36A of the Panchayati Raj Act, for sub-sections (2) and (3), the Amendment of
following sub-sections shall be substituted, namely:–– section 36A.
“(2) The salary, allowance and other conditions of service of the State
Election Commissioner shall be such as the Lieutenant Governor may, by
rules, determine:
Provided that if a person who, immediately before the date of
assuming office as the State Election Commissioner is in receipt of or has
received or has become entitled to receive a pension, other than a disability
pension, in respect of any previous service under the Government of India
or under the Government of a State or under the Government of a Union
territory, his pay in respect of service as State Election Commissioner shall
be reduced––
(a) by the amount of that pension; and
(b) if he had, before assuming office, received, in lieu of a portion
of the pension due to him in respect of such previous service, the
commuted value thereof, by the amount of that portion of the pension.
(3) The travelling allowance, provision of rent-free accommodation,
conveyance facilities, medical facilities available to a person at the time of
retirement or at the time of his appointment as State Election Commissioner, so
far as may be, shall be admissible to him.
(4) The power to grant or refuse leave to the State Election
Commissioner and to revoke or curtail leave granted to him, shall vest in the
Lieutenant Governor.”.
7. For section 36B of the Panchayati Raj Act, the following section shall be Substitution of
substituted, namely:–– section 36B.
“36B. The State Election Commissioner shall not be removed from his Removal of
office except in like manner and on the like ground as a Judge of a High State Election
Commissioner.
Court and the conditions of service of the State Election Commissioner shall
not be varied to his disadvantage after his appointment.”.
8. In section 36D of the Panchayati Raj Act, in sub-section (2),–– Amendment of
section 36D.
(a) for the opening portion “The Commission shall have the power to”,
the opening portion “The Commission referred to in sub-section (1) shall”
shall be substituted;
(b) in clause (b), for the words “give such directions”, the words “by
order give such directions” shall be substituted;
(c) in clause (c), for the word “delegate”, the words “by order, delegate,
subject to such restrictions mentioned therein,” shall be substituted.
9. In section 39 of the Panchayati Raj Act, after clause (iii), the following Amendment of
clause shall be inserted, namely:–– section 39.
“(iv) such other grounds as may be determined by the State Election
Commission.”.
4 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [Part II—
4
Amendment of 10. In section 45A of the Panchayati Raj Act,––
section 45A.
(a) in sub-section (4),––
(i) in clause (a), the word “and” occurring at the end shall be
omitted;
(ii) for clause (b), the following clauses shall be substituted,
namely:––
“(b) for the Scheduled Tribes; and
(c) for the Other Backward Classes,”;
(iii) in the long line, after the words “or of the Scheduled Tribes
in the district”, the words “or of the Other Backward Classes in the
district” shall be inserted;
(b) in sub-section (5), for the words “or, as the case may be, the
Scheduled Tribes,”, the words “or the Scheduled Tribes or the Other
Backward Classes, as the case may be,” shall be substituted;
(c) in sub-section (6), for the words “Scheduled Castes and the
Scheduled Tribes”, the words “Scheduled Castes, the Scheduled Tribes and
the Other Backward Classes” shall be substituted.
CHAPTER III
AMENDMENTS TO THE JAMMU AND KASHMIR MUNICIPAL ACT, 2000
Construction of 11. Throughout the Jammu and Kashmir Municipal Act, 2000, (hereafter in Jammu and
reference of this Chapter referred to as the Municipal Act), for the words "Chief Electoral Kashmir Act
certain XX of 2000.
expressions by Officer" and “Backward Classes”, wherever they occur, the words "State Election
certain other Commission" and “Other Backward Classes” shall respectively be substituted.
expressions.
Amendment of 12. In section 2 of the Municipal Act,––
section 2.
(a) clause (1) shall be omitted;
(b) after clause (27), the following clause shall be inserted, namely;––
‘(27a) “Other Backward Classes” means the Other Backward
Classes declared by the Government of the Union territory of Jammu and
Kashmir from time to time in accordance with sub-clause (iii) of clause (o)
of section 2 of the Jammu and Kashmir Reservation Act, 2004;’; Jammu and
Kashmir Act
(c) after clause (29b), the following clause shall be inserted, namely:–– XIV of 2004.
‘(29bb) “State Election Commission” means the Commission
constituted under section 36 of the Jammu and Kashmir Panchayati
Jammu and
Raj Act, 1989;’.
Kashmir Act
Amendment of 13. In section 11A of the Municipal Act,–– IX of 1989.
section 11A.
(a) in sub-section (1), for the words “the Scheduled Castes and the
Scheduled Tribes”, the words “the Scheduled Castes, the Scheduled Tribes
and the Other Backward Classes” shall be substituted;
(b) in sub-section (2), for the words “the Scheduled Castes or the
Scheduled Tribes”, the words “the Scheduled Castes or the Scheduled
Tribes or the Other Backward Classes” shall be substituted;
(c) in sub-section (3), for the words “the Scheduled Castes and the
Scheduled Tribes”, the words “the Scheduled Castes, the Scheduled Tribes
and the Other Backward Classes” shall be substituted;
[Sec. 1 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA5 E XTRAORDINARY 5
(d) in sub-section (3A), for the words “Scheduled Caste or Scheduled
Tribe Certificate”, the words “Scheduled Caste or Scheduled Tribe or Other
Backward Class Certificate” shall be substituted; and;
(e) for sub-section (4), the following sub-section shall be substituted,
namely,––
“(4) The State Election Commissioner shall be the competent
authority for the purposes of this section.”.
14. In section 282 of the Municipal Act, for sub-section (2), the following Amendment of
sub-section shall be substituted, namely:–– section 282.
“(2) The Commission referred to in sub-section (1) shall––
(i) require any person, including an officer or an employee of the
Government of the Union territory of Jammu and Kashmir, subject to
any privilege which may be claimed by that person under any law for
the time being in force in the Union territory of Jammu and Kashmir,
to furnish information on any matter which, in the opinion of the
Commission, may be useful for or relevant to the subject of enquiry;
(ii) by order, give such directions to the officers and employees
of the Government of the Union territory of Jammu and Kashmir, or
any other statutory body or society as it considers necessary to ensure
smooth and efficient conduct of elections under this Act;
(iii) by order, delegate, subject to such restrictions mentioned
therein, any of its powers to such officers and employees of the
Government of the Union territory of Jammu and Kashmir;
(iv) determine and delimit the municipalities in accordance with
the provisions of this Act;
(v) regulate its own procedure, including the fixing of time and
place of its sittings; and
(vi) exercise such other powers as may be determined by the
Government of the Union territory of Jammu and Kashmir, from time
to time.”.
15. After section 282 of the Municipal Act, the following section shall be Insertion of new
inserted, namely:–– section 282A.
“282A. Sections 36, 36A, 36B, 36C, 37 and section 39 of the Application of
Panchayati Raj Act [as amended by the Jammu and Kashmir Local Bodies certain
provisions of
Laws (Amendment) Act, 2024] shall, mutatis mutandis, apply to this Act.”.
Jammu and
Kashmir
Panchayati Raj
Act. 1989.
CHAPTER IV
AMENDMENTS TO THE JAMMU AND KASHMIR MUNICIPAL CORPORATION ACT, 2000
Jammu and 16. Throughout the Jammu and Kashmir Municipal Corporation Act, 2000 Construction of
Kashmir Act (hereafter in this Chapter referred to as the Municipal Corporation Act) for the reference of
XXI of 2000. certain
words “Chief Electoral Officer” and “Backward Classes”, wherever they occur,
expressions by
the words “State Election Commission” and “Other Backward Classes” shall certain other
respectively be substituted. expressions.
17. In section 2 of the Municipal Corporation Act,— Amendment of
section 2.
(a) clause (1) shall be omitted;
(b) clause (6) shall be omitted;
(c) after clause (37), the following clause shall be inserted, namely:––
66 TTHHEE GGAAZZEETTTTEE OOFF IINNDDIIAA EEXXTTRRAAOORRDDIINNAARRYY [Part II—[P aSret cII. —1]
6
‘(37a) “Other Backward Classes" means the Other Backward
Classes declared by the Government of the Union territory of Jammu and
Kashmir from time to time in accordance with sub-clause (iii) of clause (o)
of section 2 of the Jammu and Kashmir Reservation Act, 2004;’; Jammu and
Kashmir Act
(d) after clause (59), the following clause shall be inserted, namely:–– XIV of 2004.
‘(59a) “State Election Commission” means the Commission
constituted under section 36 of the Jammu and Kashmir Panchayati
Raj Act, 1989.’. Jammu and
Kashmir Act
Insertion of new 18. After section 9 of the Municipal Corporation Act, the following section IX of 1989.
section 9A. shall be inserted, namely:––
Application of “9A. Sections 36, 36A, 36B, 36C, 37 and section 39 of the Panchayati
certain provisions Raj Act and sub-section (2) of section 282 of the Municipal Act [as amended
of Jammu and
by the Jammu and Kashmir Local Bodies Laws (Amendment) Act, 2024]
Kashmir
Panchayati Raj shall, mutatis mutandis, apply to this Act.”.
Act, 1989 and
Jammu and
Kashmir
Municipal Act,
2000.
Amendment of 19. In section 10A of the Municipal Corporation Act,––
section 10A.
(a) in sub-section (1), for the words “the Scheduled Castes and the
Scheduled Tribes”, the words “the Scheduled Castes, the Scheduled Tribes
and the Other Backward Classes” shall be substituted;
(b) in sub-section (2), for the words “the Scheduled Castes or the
Scheduled Tribes”, the words “the Scheduled Castes or the Scheduled
Tribes or the Other Backward Classes” shall be substituted;
(c) in sub-section (3), for the words “the Scheduled Castes and the
Scheduled Tribes”, the words “the Scheduled Castes, the Scheduled Tribes
and the Other Backward Classes” shall be substituted;
(d) in sub-section (3A), for the words “Scheduled Caste or Scheduled
Tribe Certificate”, the words “Scheduled Caste or Scheduled Tribe or Other
Backward Class Certificate” shall be substituted; and
(e) for sub-section (4), the following sub-section shall be substituted,
namely:––
“(4) The State Election Commissioner shall be the competent
authority for the purpose of this section.”.
———
The above Bill has been passed by the Houses of Parliament. DR. RAJIV MANI,
Secretary to the Govt. of India.
Dated the Chairman.
—————
UPLOADED BY THE MANAGER, GOVERNMENT OF INDIA PRESS, MINTO ROAD, NEW DELHI–110002
AND PUBLISHED BY THE CONTROLLER OF PUBLICATIONS, DELHI–110054.
I assent to this Bill.
MGIPMRND—677GI(S3)—12-02-2024.
Dated the President.
