jftLVªh lañ Mhñ ,yñ—¼,u½04@0007@2003—24 REGISTERED NO. DL—(N)04/0007/2003—24
सी.जी.-डीx.एxलx.G-अID.-1H11x2x2x024-259352
CG-DL-E-11122024-259352
xxxGIDExxx
vlk/kkj.k
EXTRAORDINARY
Hkkx II — [k.M 1
PART II — Section 1
izkf/kdkj ls izdkf'kr
PUBLISHED BY AUTHORITY
lañ 20] ubZ fnYyh] cq/kokj] fnlEcj 11] 2024@vxzgk;.k 20] 1946 ¼'kd½
No. 20] NEW DELHI, WEDNESDAY, DECEMBER 11, 2024/AGRAHAYANA 20, 1946 (Saka)
bl Hkkx esa fHkUu i`"B la[;k nh tkrh gS ftlls fd ;g vyx ladyu ds :i esa j[kk tk ldsA
Separate paging is given to this Part in order that it may be filed as a separate compilation.
MINISTRY OF LAW AND JUSTICE
(Legislative Department)
New Delhi, the 11th December, 2024/Agrahayana 20, 1946 (Saka)
BillNo.74-Fof2024
The following Act of Parliament received the assent of the President on the
11th December, 2024 and is hereby published for general information:—
THE BHARATIYA VAYUYAN VIDHEYAK, 2024
THE BHARATIYA VAYUYAN ADHINIYAM, 2024
(AS PASSED BY THE HOUSES OF PARLIAMENT)
No. 16 of 2024
A
[11th December, 2024.]
BILL
An Act to provide for regulation and control of the design, manufacture,
to prmovaiidnet efonra nrecgeu, laptoiosnse asnsido cno, nutrsoel, oofp tehrea dtieosnig,n s, amlea,n euxfapcoturrt ea, nmda iinmtepnoanrtc eo,f
possession, use, operation, sale, export and import of aircraft and for
aircraft and for matters connected therewith or incidental thereto.
matters connected therewithor incidental thereto.
BEit enacted by Parliament in the Seventy-fifth Year of the Republic of
India as follows:—
CHAPTER I
PRELIMINARY
1.(1) This Act may be called theBharatiya Vayuyan Adhiniyam, 2024. Short title,
extent,
(2)It extends to the whole of India and appliesto—
application and
(a)citizens of India wherever they may be; commencement.
(b) the aircraft, and the persons on aircraft, registered in India
wherever they may be;
(c) the aircraft, and the persons on aircraft, registered outside India,
but for the time being in or over India; and
(d) an aircraft operated by a person who is not a citizen of India but
has his principal place of business or permanent residence in India.
2 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [Part II—
2
(3) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may,
by notification in the Official Gazette,appoint.
Definitions. 2.In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,––
(1) “aerodrome” means any definite or limited ground or water area
intended to be used, either wholly or inpart, for the landing, departure and
surface movement of aircraft, and includes all buildings, sheds, vessels,
piers and other structures thereon or appertaining thereto;
(2)“aerodrome reference point”, in relation to any aerodrome, means
a designated point established in the horizontal plane at or near the
geometric centre of that part of the aerodrome reserved for the departure or
landing of aircraft;
(3) “aircraft” means any machine that can derive support in the
atmosphere from reactions of the air,other than reactions of the air against
the earth’s surface;
(4) “Aircraft Accidents Investigation Bureau” means the Aircraft
Accidents Investigation Bureau constituted under section 7;
(5) “Bureau of Civil Aviation Security” means the Bureau of Civil
Aviation Security constituted under section 5;
(6) “design” means the set of data and information that defines the
configuration of an aeronautical product type, its associated parts and
appliances for the purpose of airworthiness determination;
(7) “Directorate General of Civil Aviation” means the Directorate
General of Civil Aviation constituted under section 3;
(8)“export” means taking out of India;
(9)“import” means bringing into India;
(10)“maintenance” means the performance of the tasks on an aircraft,
engine, propeller or associated part required to ensure the continuing
airworthiness of an aircraft, engine, propeller or associated part including
any one or combination of overhaul, inspection, replacement, defect
rectification, and the embodiment of a modification or repair;
(11) “manufacture” means the performance of tasks that involve
assembly or production of aircraft, engine, propeller or associated parts and
appliances in conformity with its applicable design including prototype;
(12)“prescribed” means prescribed by rules made under this Act.
CHAPTER II
DIRECTORATEGENERALOFCIVILAVIATION
3. (1) The Directorate General of Civil Aviation constituted under the
Directorate
General of Aircraft Act, 1934 shall be deemed to have beenconstituted underthis Act, which 22 of 1934.
Civil shall be headed by an officer designated as the Director General of Civil Aviation
Aviation.
appointed in this behalf by the Central Government by notification in the Official
Gazette.
(2) The Directorate General of Civil Aviation shall be responsible for
carrying out the safety oversight and regulatory functions in respect of matters
specified in this Act or the rules made thereunder.
(3) The administration of the Directorate General of Civil Aviation shall
vest in the Director General of Civil Aviation.
(4) The Central Government may, by an order published in the Official
Gazette, direct that any power exercisable by the Director General of Civil
Aviation may also be exercisable by any other officer or authority specially
empowered in this behalf by the Central Government.
Sec. 1] THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 3
3
4. (1) The Director General of Civil Aviation or any other officer Power of
Director General
specially empowered in this behalf by the Central Government may, from time
of Civil
to time, by order, issue directions, consistent with the provisions of this Act and Aviation to issue
the rules made thereunder, with respect to any of the matters specified in clauses directions.
(b), (e), (g), (i), (j), (k), (l), (m), (n), (o), (p), (q), (r), (s), (w), (zb), (zc), (zd)and (zf)
of sub-section (2) of section 10, to any person or persons using any
aerodrome or engaged in the aircraft operations, air traffic control,
maintenance and operation of aerodrome, communication, navigation,
surveillance and air traffic management facilities and safeguarding civil
aviation against acts of unlawful interference, in any case where the Director
General of Civil Aviation or such other officer is satisfied that in the interests
of the security of India or for securing the safety of aircraft operations it is
necessary so to do.
(2) Every order passed under sub-section (1) shall be complied with by the
persontowhomsuchorderisissued.
CHAPTERIII
BUREAU OF CIVILAVIATIONSECURITY
5. (1) The Bureau of Civil Aviation Security constituted under the Aircraft Bureau of Civil
Aviation
22of1934. Act, 1934 shall be deemed to have been constituted under this Act, which shall
Security.
be headed by an officer designated as the Director General of Bureau of Civil
Aviation Security appointed in this behalf by the Central Government by
notification in the Official Gazette.
(2) The Bureau of Civil Aviation Security shall be responsible for carrying
out the regulatory and oversight functions in respect of matters relating to civil
aviation security specified in this Act or the rules made thereunder.
(3)TheadministrationoftheBureauofCivilAviationSecurityshallvestin the
DirectorGeneralofBureauofCivilAviationSecurity.
(4) The Central Government may, by an order published in the Official
Gazette, direct that any power exercisable by the Director General of Bureau of
Civil Aviation Security may also be exercisable by any other officer or
authority specially empowered in this behalf by the Central Government.
6. (1) The Director General of Bureau of Civil Aviation Security or any Power of
other officer specially empowered in this behalf by the Central Government may, Director General
of Bureau of
from time to time, by order, issue directions, consistent with the provisions of
Civil Aviation
this Act and the rules made thereunder, with respect to any of the matters Security to issue
specified in clauses (i), (j), (o), (ze), and (zg) of sub-section (2) of section 10, to directions.
any person or persons using any aerodrome, or engaged in the aircraft
operations, air traffic control, maintenance and operation of aerodrome, or
safeguarding civil aviation against acts of unlawful interference, in any case
where the Director General of Bureau of Civil Aviation Security or such other
officer is satisfied that in the interests of the security of India or to ensure
security of civil aviation operations, it is necessary so to do.
(2)Everypersontowhomtheorderisissuedundersub-section(1)shall comply
withsuchorder.
CHAPTERIV
AIRCRAFTACCIDENTSINVESTIGATIONBUREAU
7. (1) The Aircraft Accidents Investigation Bureau constituted under Aircraft
Accidents
22 of 1934. the Aircraft Act, 1934 shall be deemed to have been constituted under this Act, Investigation
which shall be headed by an officer designated as the Director General of Bureau.
Aircraft Accidents Investigation Bureau appointed in this behalf by the
Central Government by notification in the Official Gazette.
(2) The Aircraft Accidents Investigation Bureau shall be responsible
for carrying out the functions in respect of matters relating to investigation of
aircraft accidents or incidents specified in this Act or the rules made thereunder.
4 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [Part II—
4
(3)The administration of the Aircraft Accidents Investigation Bureau shall
vest in the Director General of Aircraft Accidents Investigation Bureau.
(4) The Central Government may, by an order published in the Official
Gazette, direct that any power exercisable by the Director General of Aircraft
Accidents Investigation Bureau may also be exercisable by any other officer or
authority specially empowered in this behalf by the Central Government.
CHAPTER V
POWERS OF CENTRALGOVERNMENT
Superintendence 8. The superintendence of the Directorate General of Civil Aviation, the
of Central Bureau of Civil Aviation Security and the Aircraft Accidents Investigation Bureau
Government.
shall vest in the Central Government, which shall have the power to issue
directions to each of these organisations, on any matters falling under
sub-section (2) of sections 3, 5 and 7, respectively, if it considers necessary or
expedient so to do in the public interest.
Power of 9.(1) Where the Central Government considers it necessary orexpedient so
Central to do in the public interest, it may, on receipt of a representation from any person
Government to
or otherwise, review any order passed by the Director General of Civil Aviation
review orders
passed under under section 4 or by the Director General of Bureau of Civil Aviation Security
section 4 or under section 6 and issue such directions, as it deems fit, to the concerned Director
section 6.
General to rescind or modify the order so passed.
(2)The Director General of Civil Aviation or the Director General of Bureau
of Civil Aviation Security, as the case may be, shall comply with every direction
issued under sub-section (1) and either rescind or modify the order so passed by
him under section 4 or section 6, as the case may be.
Power of 10.(1) Subject to the provisions of section 34, the Central Government may,
Central by notification in the Official Gazette, make rules regulating the design,
Government
manufacture, maintenance, possession, use, operation, sale, import or export of
to make rules.
any aircraft or class of aircraft and for securing the safety of aircraft operations.
(2) Without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing power, such rules
may provide for—
(a) theauthorities bywhichanyof thepowersconferredbyor under
this Act are to be exercised;
(b) the regulation of air transport services, and the prohibition of the
use of aircraft in such services except under the authority of and in
accordance with a licence authorising the establishment of the service;
(c) the economic regulation of civil aviation and air transport services,
including the approval, disapproval or revision on tariff of operators of air
transport services, other than the tariff referred to in clause (a) of
sub-section (1) of section13 of the AirportsEconomic Regulatory Authority
of India Act, 2008; the officers or authorities who may exercise powers in 27 of 2008.
this behalf; the procedure to be followed and the factors to be taken into
account by such officers or authorities; appeals to the Central Government
against orders of such officers or authorities and all other matters connected
with such tariff.
Explanation.—For the purposes of this clause, “tariff” includes fares,
rates, valuation charges and other charges for air transport of passengers or
goods, the rules, regulations, practices or services affecting such fares,
rates, valuation charges and other charges and the rates, terms and
conditions of commission payable to passenger or cargo sales agents;
Sec. 1] THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 5
5
(d)the information to be furnished by an applicant for, or the holder of,
a licence authorising the establishment of an air transport service to such
authorities as may be specified in the rules;
(e) the licensing, inspection and regulation of aerodromes, the
conditions under which aerodromes may be maintained and the prohibition
or regulation of the use of unlicensed aerodromes;
(f) the fees which may be charged at those aerodromes to which the
Airports Authority of India Act, 1994 or the Airports Economic Regulatory
55 of 1994.
27 of 2008. Authority of India Act, 2008 does not apply or are not made applicable;
(g) the inspection and control of the design, manufacture, repair and
maintenance of aircraft and of places where aircraft are being designed,
manufactured, repaired or kept;
(h)the registration and marking of aircraft;
(i) the conditions under which aircraft may be flown, or may carry
passengers, mails or goods, or may be used for industrial purposes and the
certificates, licences or documents to be carried by aircraft;
(j)the inspection of aircraft or any facility for the design, manufacture,
maintenance, or operation of aircraft for the purpose of enforcing the
provisions of this Act and the rules thereunder;
(k) the licensing of persons employed in the operation, manufacture,
repair or maintenance of aircraft;
(l)the licensing of persons engagedin air traffic control;
(m)the certification and licensing of personnel engaged in the operation
of radio telephone or telegraph for the conduct of operation and maintenance
of aircraft and associated equipment;
(n) the certification, inspection and regulation of communication,
navigation and surveillance and air traffic management facilities;
(o) the measures to safeguard civil aviation against acts of unlawful
interference;
(p) the regulation of air navigation services, that is, aeronautical
information services, aeronautical charting and cartography services,
aeronautical meteorological services, search and rescue services, procedure
for air navigation services and aircraft operations other than those referred to
in clause (n) and any other matter relating to air navigation services;
(q) the air-routes by which, and the conditions under which, aircraft
may enter or leave India, or may fly within or over India, and the places at
which aircraft shall land or take-off;
(r) the prohibition of flight by aircraft over any specified area, either
absolutely or at specified times, or subject to specified conditions and
exceptions;
(s)the supply, supervision and control of air-route beacons, aerodrome
lights, and lights at or in the neighbourhood of aerodromes or on or in the
neighbourhood of air-routes;
(t)the installation and maintenance of lights on private property in the
neighbourhood of aerodromes or on or in the neighbourhood of air-routes, by
the owners or occupiers of such property, the payment by the Central
Government for such installation and maintenance, and the supervision and
control of such installation and maintenance, including the right of access to
the property for such purposes;
6 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [Part II—
6
(u) the signals to be used for purposes of communication by or to
aircraft and the apparatus to be employed in signaling;
(v) the prohibition and regulation of the carriage in aircraft of any
specified article, dangerous goods or substance;
(w) the measures to be taken and the equipment to be carried for the
purpose of ensuring the safety of life;
(x)the issue and maintenance of log-books;
(y) the manner and conditions of the issue or renewal of any licence,
certificate or approval under this Act or the rules made thereunder, the
examinations and tests to be undergone in connection therewith, the form,
custody, production, endorsement, cancellation, suspension or surrender of
such licence, certificate or approval, or of any log-book;
(z) the fees to be charged in connection with any inspection,
examination, test, certificate, licence or approval, made, issued or renewed
under this Act;
(za) the recognition for the purposes of this Act of licences and
certificates issued elsewhere than in India relating to aircraft or to the
qualifications of persons employed in the operation, manufacture, repair or
maintenance of aircraft;
(zb) the prohibition of slaughtering and flaying of animals and of
depositing rubbish, filth and other polluted and obnoxious matter within a
radius of ten kilometres from the aerodrome reference point;
(zc) regulation for control of obstruction limiting surfaces around an
aerodrome or communication and navigation services facility;
(zd) safety oversight and regulatory functions;
(ze) security oversight and its regulatory functions;
(zf) the areas and manner in which the Director General of Civil
Aviation may issue directions for carrying out safety oversight and regulatory
functions and grant exemption from compliance with such directions;
(zg) the areas and manner in which the Director General of Bureau of
Civil Aviation Security may issue directions for carrying out security
oversight functions and grant exemption from compliance with such
directions;
(zh) to determine the amount of monetary penalty;
(zi) any matter subsidiary or incidental to the matters referred to in this
sub-section.
Power of 11.(1) Subject to the provisions of section 34, the Central Government may,
Central by notification in the Official Gazette, make such rules as appear to it to be
Government
necessary for carrying out the Convention relating to International Civil Aviation
to make
rules to signed at Chicago on the 7th day of December, 1944 (including any Annex thereto
implement relating to international standards and recommended practices) as amended from
Convention.
time to time.
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in the Telecommunications
Act, 2023, but subject to the provisions of section 34, the Central Government may, 44of2023.
by notification in the Official Gazette, make such rules as may appear to it to be
necessaryor expedientfor the issuance of Radio Telephone Operator (Restricted)
Certificate and Licence to persons engaged in the operation and maintenance of
aircraft, in accordance with the applicable provisions of the International
Telecommunication Convention as amended from time to time.
Sec. 1] THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 7
7
12.(1) Subject to the provisions of section 34, the Central Government may, Power of
Central
by notification in the Official Gazette, make rules providing for the investigation
Government to
of any accident or incident arising out of or in the course of the navigation— make rules for
investigation
(a)in or over India of any aircraft;or of accidents.
(b)anywhere of aircraft registered in India.
(2) Without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing power, such rules
may—
(a)require notice to be given of any accident or incident in such manner
and by such person as may be specified therein;
(b)apply for the purposes of such investigation, either with or without
modification, the provisions of any law for thetime being in force relating to
the investigation of accident or incident;
(c)prohibit pending investigation access to or interference with aircraft
to which an accident or incident has occurred, and authorise any person so
far as may be necessary for the purposes of an investigation to have access
to, examine, remove, take measures for the preservation of, or otherwise deal
with, any such aircraft; and
(d) authorise or require the cancellation, suspension, endorsement or
surrender of any licence or certificate granted or recognised under this Act
when it appears on an investigation that the licence ought to be so dealt with,
and provide for the production of any such licence for such purpose.
13.Subject to the provisions of section 34, the Central Government may, by Power of
notification in the Official Gazette, make rules for the prevention of danger arising Central
Government to
to the public health by the introduction or spread of any infectious or contagious
make rules for
disease from aircraft arriving at or being at any aerodrome and for the prevention protecting
of the conveyance of infection or contagion by means of any aircraft leaving an public health.
aerodrome and in particular and without prejudice to the generality of this
provision may make, with respect to aircraft and aerodromes or any specified
aerodrome, rules providing for any of the matters for which rules under
sub-clauses (i) to (viii) of clause (p) of sub-section (1) of section 6 of the Indian
15 of 1908. PortsAct, 1908, may be made with respect to vessels and ports.
14.(1) If the Central Government is satisfied that India or any part thereof is Emergency
powers of
visited by or threatened with an outbreak of any dangerous epidemic disease, and
Central
that the ordinary provisions of the law for the time being in force are insufficient Government
for the prevention of danger arising to the public health through the introduction or for protecting
public health.
spread of the disease by the agency of aircraft, the Central Government may take
such measures as it deems necessary to prevent such danger.
(2) In any such case the Central Government may, without prejudice to the
powers conferred by section 13, by notification in the Official Gazette, make such
temporary rules with respect to aircraft and persons travelling or things carried
therein and aerodromes as it deems necessary in the circumstances.
(3) Notwithstanding anything contained in section 34, the power to make
rules under sub-section (2) shall not be subject to the condition of the rules being
made after previous publication, but such rules shall not remain in force for more
than three months from the date of notification:
Provided that the Central Government may by special order continue them in
force for a further period or periods of not more than three months in all.
8 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [Part II—
8
Power of 15. (1) If the Central Government is of opinion that in the interest of public
Central
safety or tranquillity the issue of all or any of the following orders is expedient, it
Government
to make may, by notification in the Official Gazette,—
orders in
(a)cancel or suspend, either absolutely or subject to such conditions as
emergency.
it may think fit to specify in the order, all or any licence, certificate or
approval issued under this Act;
(b) prohibit, either absolutely or subject to such conditions as it may
think fit to specify in the order, or regulate in such manner as may be
contained in the order, the flight of all or any aircraft or class of aircraft over
the whole or any portion of India;
(c)prohibit, either absolutely, or conditionally, or regulate theerection,
maintenance or use of any aerodrome, aircraft facility, Flying Training
Organisation or place where aircraft are designed, manufactured, repaired or
kept, or any class or description thereof; and
(d)direct that any aircraft or class of aircraft or any aerodrome, aircraft
facility, Flying Training Organisation or place where aircraft are designed,
manufactured, repaired or kept, together with any machinery, plant, material
or things used for the design, operation, manufacture, repair or maintenance
of aircraft shall be delivered, either forthwith or within a specified time, to
such authority and in such manner as it may specify in the order, to be at the
disposal of that Government for the public service.
(2)Any order made under sub-section (1) shall have effect notwithstanding
anything inconsistent therewith contained in any rule made under this Act.
(3)Any person who suffers direct injury or loss by reason of any order made
under clause (c) or clause (d) of sub-section (1) shall be paid such compensation
as may be determined by such authority as the Central Government may appoint in
this behalf.
(4)The Central Government may authorise such steps to be taken to secure
compliance with any order made under sub-section (1) as appear to it to be
necessary.
(5)Whoever knowingly disobeys, or fails to comply with, or does any act in
contravention of, an order made under sub-section (1), shall be punishable with
imprisonment for a term which may extend to three years, or with fine, or with
both, and the Court by which he is convicted may direct that the aircraft or thing
(if any) in respect of which the offence has been committed, or any part of such
thing, shall be forfeited tothe CentralGovernment.
Power of 16.Subject to the provisions of section 34, the Central Government may, by
Central notification in the Official Gazette, make rules which may provide for securing the
Government
safe custody and re-delivery of any property which, while not in proper custody, is
to make
rules for found on any aerodrome or in any aircraft on any aerodrome and any such rules
securing safe may, in particular, provide for—
custody and
re-delivery (a)the payment of charges in respect of any such property before it is
of unclaimed re-delivered to the person entitled thereto; and
property.
(b) the disposal of any such property in cases where the same is not
re-delivered to the person entitled thereto before the expiration of such period
as may be specified therein.
Power to 17. (1) Any authority authorised in this behalf by the Central Government
detain
may detain any aircraft, if in the opinion of such authority—
aircraft.
(a)having regard to the nature of an intended flight, the flight of such
aircraft would involve danger to persons in the aircraft or to any other person
or property; or
Sec. 1] THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 9
9
(b) such detention is necessary to secure compliance with any of the
provisions of this Act or the rules applicable to such aircraft; or such
detention is necessary to prevent a contravention of any rule made under
clause (q) or clause (r) of sub-section (2) of section 10 or to implement any
order made by any court.
(2)Subject to the provisions of section 34, the Central Government may, by
notification in the Official Gazette, make rules regulating all matters incidental or
subsidiary to the exercise of this power.
18. (1) If the Central Government is of opinion that it is necessary or Power of
expedient so to do for the safety of aircraft operations, it may, by notification in Central
Governmentto
the Official Gazette,—
prohibit or
regulate
(a) direct that no building or structure shall be constructed or erected,
construction of
or no tree shall be planted on any land within such radius, not exceeding
buildings,
twenty kilometres from the aerodrome reference point, as may be specified planting of
in the notification and where there is any building, structure or tree on such trees, and the
like.
land, also direct the owner or the person having control of such building,
structure or tree to demolish such building or structure or, as the case may be,
to cut such tree within such period as may be specified in the notification;
(b) direct that no building or structure higher than such height as may
be specified in the notification shall be constructed or erected, or no tree,
which is likely to grow or ordinarily grows higher than such height as may
be specified in the notification, shall be planted, on any land within such
radius, not exceeding twenty kilometres from the aerodrome reference point,
as may be specified in the notification and where the height of any building
or structure or tree on such land is higher than the specified height, also direct
the owner or the person having control of such building, structure or tree to
reduce the height thereof so as not to exceed the specified height, within such
period as may be specified in the notification.
(2)In specifying the radius under clause (a) or clause (b) of sub-section (1)
and in specifying the height of any building, structure or tree under the said
clause (b), the Central Government shall have regard to—
(a)the nature of the aircraft operated or intended to be operated in the
aerodrome; and
(b) the international standards and recommended practices governing
the operation of aircraft.
(3) Where any notification has been issued under sub-section (1) directing
the owner or the person having control of any building, structure or tree to demolish
such building or structure or to cut such tree or to reduce the height of any building,
structure or tree, a copy of the notification containing such direction shall be served
on the owner or the person having the control of the building, structure or tree, as
the case may be,—
(a)by delivering or tendering it to such owner or person; or
(b) if it cannot be so delivered or tendered, by delivering or tendering
it to any officer of such owner or person or any adult member of the family
of such owner or person or by affixing a copy thereof on the outer door or on
some conspicuous part of the premises in which such owner or person is
known to have last resided or carried on business or personally worked for
gainordelivering by mail or any other electronic means; or
(c) failing service by any of the means specified in clause (a) or
clause (b), by post.
(4) Every person shall be bound to comply with any direction contained in
any notification issued under sub-section (1).
10 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [Part II—
10
Power of 19. (1) Notwithstanding anything contained in this Act, if any person
Central
contravenes any of the provisions of this Act or the rules made or the directions
Government
to restrict, issued thereunder, the Central Government or any officer authorised in this behalf,
suspend or may impose any restriction or suspend or cancel the licence, certificate or approval
cancel issued to such person under this Act, in such manner as may be prescribed.
licence,
certificate or
(2)On being satisfied that there has been contravention of the provisions of
approval.
the Act or the rules made or directions issued under this Act by any person, the
Central Government or any officer authorised under sub-section (1) may, by an
order in writing,––
(i)suspend or cancel the licence, certificate or approval; or
(ii)impose restrictions on the licence, certificate or approval,
issued to such person stating the nature of contravention of the respective
provisions of the Act, rule or the direction which has been contravened and the
reasons for such suspension or cancellation or imposition of restriction.
(3) The Central Government or the officer authorised under sub-section (1)
shall, before passing an order under sub-section (2), give an opportunity of being
heard to the person concerned.
(4) The Central Government may, in the rules made under this section,
specify the grounds on which the licence, certificate or approval may be suspended
or the circumstances under which such restrictions may be imposed with
immediate effect.
Power of 20.The CentralGovernment may, by notification in the Official Gazette,and
Central for the reasons provided therein, exempt from all or any of the provisions of this
Government
Act or the rules made thereunder, any aircraft or class of aircraft and any person or
to exempt
certain class of persons, or may direct that such provisions shall apply to such aircraft or
aircraft. persons subject to such modifications as may be specified in the notification.
Power of 21.The Central Government may, by order published in the Official Gazette,
Central direct that the powers (except the power to make rules under this Act) exercisable
Government
by it under this Act may also be exercisable by the Director General of Civil
to delegate.
Aviation or the Director General of Bureau of Civil Aviation Security or the
Director General of Aircraft Accidents Investigation Bureau or any other officer or
authority specifically empowered in this behalf by the Central Government.
CHAPTER VI
PAYMENT OF COMPENSATION FOR LOSS OR DAMAGE
Manner of 22.(1) If in consequence of any direction contained in any notification issued
determination under sub-section (1) of section 18, any person sustains any loss or damage, such
and payment
person shall be paid compensation the amount of which shall be determined in the
of
compensation manner and in accordance with the principles hereinafter set out, that is to say,—
for loss or
damage. (a) where the amount of compensation can be fixed by agreement, it
shall be paid in accordance with such agreement;
(b)where no such agreement can be reached, the Central Government
shall appoint as arbitrator a person who is or has been qualified for
appointment as a Judge of a High Court;
(c) the Central Government may, in any particular case, nominate a
person having adequate knowledge as to the nature of the loss or damage
suffered by the person to be compensated and where such nomination is
made, the person to be compensated may also nominate an assessor for the
same purpose;
Sec. 1] THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 11
11
(d) at the commencement of the proceedings before the arbitrator, the
Central Government and the person to be compensated shall state what, in
their respective opinion, is a fair amount of compensation;
(e) the arbitrator shall, after hearing the dispute, make an award
determining the amount of compensation which appears to him to be just and
specify the person or persons to whom such compensation shall be paid; and
in making the award he shall have regard to the circumstances of each case
and,—
(i) the damage sustained by the person to be compensated in his
earnings;
(ii) if in consequence of any direction contained in any
notification issued under sub-section (1) of section 18,the marketvalue
of the land immediately after the issue of such notification is
diminished, the diminution in such market value;
(iii)where any building or structure has been demolished or any
tree has been cut or the height of any building, structure or tree hasbeen
reduced in pursuance of any direction, the damage sustained by the
person to be compensated in consequence of such demolition, cutting
or reduction and the expenses incurred by such person for such
demolition, cutting or reduction;
(iv) if the person to be compensated is compelled to change his
residence or place of business, the reasonable expenses, if any, that may
have to be incurred by him incidental to such change;
(f) where there is any dispute as to the person or persons who are
entitled to the compensation, the arbitrator shall decide such dispute and if
the arbitrator finds that more persons than one are entitled to compensation,
he shall apportion the amount thereof amongst such persons;
26 of 1996. (g)nothing in the Arbitration and Conciliation Act,1996 shall apply to
arbitrations under this section.
(2) Every award made by the arbitrator under clause (e) of sub-section (1)
shall also state the amount of costs incurred in the proceedings before it and by
what persons and in what proportions they are to be paid.
23. Any person aggrieved by an award of the arbitrator made under Appeal from
section 22 may, within thirty days from the date of such award, prefer an appeal to award in
respect of
the High Court within whose jurisdiction the aerodrome is situate:
compensation.
Provided that the High Court may entertain the appeal after the expiry of the
said period of thirty days, if it is satisfied that the appellant was prevented by
sufficient cause from filing the appeal in time.
24. The arbitrator appointed under section 22, while holding arbitration Arbitrator to
proceedings under this Act, shall have all the powers of a civil court while trying a have certain
powers of civil
5 of 1908. suit under the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908 in respect of the following matters,
courts.
namely:—
(a) summoning and enforcing the attendance of any person and
examining him on oath;
(b)requiring the discovery and production of any document;
(c)reception of evidence on affidavits;
(d)requisitioning any public record from any court or office;
(e)issuing commissions for examination of witnesses.
12 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [Part II—
12
CHAPTER VII
OFFENCES AND PENALTIES
Penalty for 25. (1) If any person contravenes any provision of any rule made under
contravention clause (v) of sub-section (2) of section 10 prohibiting or regulating the carriage in
of rule made
aircraft of arms, explosives or other dangerous goods, or when required under the
under this
Act. rules made under that clause to give information in relation to any such goods gives
information which is false and which he either knows or believes to be false or
does not believe to be true, he, and if he is not the owner, the owner also (unless
the owner proves that the offence was committed without his knowledge, consent
or connivance) shall be punishable with imprisonment which may extend to two
years,or withfine which may extend to one crore rupees,orwithboth.
(2) If any person contravenes any provision of any rule made under
clause (zb) of sub-section (2) of section 10 prohibiting the slaughter and flaying of
animals and of depositing rubbish, filth and other polluted and obnoxious matters
within a radius of ten kilometres from the aerodrome reference point, he shall be
punishable with imprisonment which may extend to three years, or with fine which
may extend to one crore rupees, or with both.
(3) Notwithstanding anything contained in the Bharatiya Nagarik Suraksha
Sanhita, 2023 an offence referred to in sub-section (2) shall be cognizable. 46 of 2023.
(4) In making any other rule under section 10, section 11, section 12,
section 13, section 14 or section 17, the Central Government may, direct that a
breach of it shall bepunishable with imprisonment for a period which may extend
to two years, or with fine which may extend to one crore rupees, or with both.
Penalty for 26. Whoever wilfully flies any aircraft in such a manner as to cause danger
flying so as to any person or to any property on landor water or in the air shall be punishable
to cause
with imprisonment for a term which may extend to two years, or with fine which
danger.
may extend to one crore rupees, or with both.
Penalty for 27. If any person wilfully fails to comply with any direction issued under
failure to
section 4 or section 6, he shall be punishable with imprisonment for a term which
comply with
directions may extend to two years or with fine which may extend to one crore rupees, or with
issued under both.
section 4 or
section 6.
Penalty for 28.(1) If any person wilfullyfails to comply with any direction contained in
failure to any notification issued under section 18, he shall be punishable with imprisonment
comply with
for a term which may extend to two years, or with fine which may extend to one
directions
issued under crore rupees, or with both.
section 18.
(2)Without prejudice to the provisions of sub-section (1), if any person fails
to demolish any building or structure or cut any tree or fails to reduce the height of
any building, structure or tree in pursuance of any direction contained in any
notification issued undersub-section (1) of section 18 within the period specified
in the notification, then, subject to such rules as the Central Government may make
in this behalf, it shall be competent for any officer authorised by the Central
Government in this behalf to demolish such building or structure or cut such tree
or reduce the height of such building, structure or tree:
Provided that the power to make rules under this sub-section shall be subject
to the provisions of section 34.
Penalty for 29.Whoever abets the commission of any offence under this Act or the rules
abetment of or attempts to commit such offence, and in such attempt does any act towards the
offences and
commission of the offence, shall be liable to the punishment provided for the
attempted
offences. offence.
Sec. 1] THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 13
13
30. (1) Notwithstanding anything contained in the Bharatiya Nagarik Composition
of offences.
46 of 2023. Suraksha Sanhita, 2023, any offence punishable under this Act or under any rules
made thereunder, not being an offence punishable with imprisonment only, or
punishable with imprisonment and also with fine, may be compounded, either
before or after the institution of any prosecution, by the Director General of Civil
Aviation or Director General of Bureau of Civil Aviation Security or Director
General of Aircraft Accidents Investigation Bureau, as the case may be, in such
manner, and for such amount not exceeding one crore rupees, as may be
prescribed.
(2) Nothing contained in sub-section (1) shall apply to an offence committed
by a person for the second time or thereafter within a period of five years from the
date of commission of a similar offence which was earlier compounded or for
which such person was earlier convicted.
(3) Every officer referred to in sub-section (1) shall exercise the powers to
compound an offence, subject to the direction, control and supervision of the
Central Government.
(4) Every application for the compounding of an offence shall be made in
such manner as may be prescribed.
(5) Where any offence is compounded before the institution of any
prosecution, no prosecution shall be instituted in relation to such offence by an
officer referred to in sub-section (1) against the offender in relation to whom the
offence is so compounded.
(6) Where the composition of any offence is made after the institution of any
prosecution, such composition shall be brought to the notice of the court in which
the prosecution is pending, in writing, by the officer referred to in sub-section (1),
and on such notice of the composition of the offence beinggiven, the person against
whom the offence is so compounded shall be discharged.
(7) Thecompositionofanoffenceunder thissectionshall havetheeffect of
an acquittalof the accusedwith whom theoffence has been compounded.
(8) No offence specified in sub-section (1) shall be compounded except as
provided in this section.
31. (1) No court shall take cognizance of any offence punishable under this Cognizance of
Act, save on a complaint made by or with the previous sanction in writing by the offences.
Director General of Civil Aviation or Director General of Bureau of Civil Aviation
Security or Director General of Aircraft Accidents Investigation Bureau, as the
case may be.
(2) The complaint referred to in sub-section (1) shall be made within a period
of one year from the date on which the offence came to the knowledge of the
Director General of Civil Aviation or the Director General of Bureau of Civil
Aviation Security or the Director General of Aircraft Accidents Investigation
Bureau, as the case may be.
(3) Notwithstanding anything contained in the Bharatiya Nagarik Suraksha
46 of 2023. Sanhita, 2023, no court inferior to that of a Judicial Magistrate of the first class
shall try the offences under this Act.
32. (1) Notwithstanding anything contained in section 25, the Central Adjudication
Government may, in making any rule under section 10, section 11, section 12, of penalties.
section 13, section 14, or section 17, provide for imposition of penalty, not
exceeding one crore rupees as may be prescribed, for the contravention of any rule.
(2) The Central Government may, by an order published in the Official
Gazette, appoint such number of officers not below the rank of Deputy Secretary
to the Government of India or equivalent, as it considers necessary, to be
designated officers for adjudging penalty under sub-section (1), in such manner as
may be prescribed.
14 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [Part II—
14
(3)The Central Government may, while appointing designated officers under
sub-section (2), also specify their jurisdiction in that order.
(4) Where the designated officer is satisfied that any contravention of the
provisions of the rules has been committed by any person, he may, by an order in writing,
impose penalty on such person stating the nature of contravention, the provision of rules
which has been contravened and the reasons for imposing such penalty:
Provided that the designated officer shall, before imposing any penalty, give
anopportunity of being heard to such person:
Provided further that the designated officer shall not proceed for imposition
of penalty under sub-section (4), if an action under this Act other than the
imposition of such penalty has been initiated for contravention of same provision
on the same cause of action.
Appeal. 33. (1) Any person aggrieved by any order made under sub-section (2) of
section 19 or under sub-section (4) of section 32, may prefer an appeal to the First
Appellate Officer having jurisdiction in the matter who is next higher in rank to
such officer who has passed the order.
(2) The First Appellate Officer may, after giving an opportunity of being
heard to the parties, pass such order, as he thinks fit, confirming, modifying or
setting aside the order appealed against.
(3)Any person aggrieved by any order passed by the First Appellate Officer,
may prefer an appeal to the Second Appellate Officer having jurisdiction in the
matter who is next higher in rank to the First Appellate Officer.
(4)The Second Appellate Officer may, after giving an opportunity of being
heard to the parties, pass such order as he thinks fit, confirming, modifying or
setting aside the order passed by the First Appellate Officer.
(5) Notwithstanding anything contained in the foregoing sub-sections, the
appeal under sub-section (1) or under sub-section (3) against an order passed by
the Director General of Civil Aviation or the Director General of Bureau of Civil
Aviation Security shall lie to the Central Government.
(6) Where any order under sub-section (5) is passed by the Central
Government, no further appeal shall lie against such order.
(7)Every appeal under this section shall be filed within thirty days from the
date of receipt of the copy of the order passed, and in such form and manner and
accompanied with such documents and fee as may be prescribed:
Provided that the said period may be extended by such further period, for
reasons to be recorded in writing, but not exceeding thirty days.
CHAPTER VIII
MISCELLANEOUS
Rules to be 34.Any power to make rules conferred by this Act is subject to the condition
made after of the rules being made after previous publication:
publication.
Provided that the Central Government may, in the public interest, by order in
writing, dispense with the condition of previous publication in any case.
Laying of 35.Every rule made under this Act shall be laid,as soon as may be after it is
rules before made, before each House of Parliament while it is in session for a total period of
Parliament. thirty days which may be comprised in one session or in two or more successive
sessions, and if, before the expiry of the session immediately following the session
or the successive sessions aforesaid, both Houses agree in making any modification
in the rule, or both Houses agree that the rule should not be made, the rule shall
thereafter have effect only in such modified form or be of no effect, as the case
may be; so, however, that any such modification or annulment shall be without
prejudice to the validity of anything previously done under that rule.
Sec. 1] THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 15
15
36. Where any person is convicted of an offence punishable under Power of
Court to order
sub-section (1) of section 25 or under any rule made under clause (r) of
forfeiture.
sub-section (2) of section 10, the Court by which he is convicted may direct that
the aircraft or article or substance, as the case may be, in respect of which the
offence has been committed, shall be forfeited tothe Central Government.
44 of 1958. 37. (1) The provisions of Part XIII of the Merchant Shipping Act, 1958, Wreck and
relating to Wreck and Salvage shall apply to aircraft on or over the sea or tidal salvage.
water as they apply to ships, and the owner of an aircraft shall be entitled to a
reasonable reward for salvage services rendered by the aircraft in like manner as
the owner of a ship.
(2) The Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette,
make such modifications of the said provisions in their application to aircraft as
appear necessary or expedient.
39 of 1970. 38. The provisions of the Patents Act, 1970 shall apply to the use of an Use of
invention on any aircraft not registered in India in like manner as they apply to the patented
invention on
use of an invention in a foreign vessel.
aircraft not
registered in
India.
39. No suit shall be brought in any civil court in respect of trespass or in Bar of certain
respect of nuisance by reason only of the flight of aircraft over any property at a suits.
height above the ground which having regard to wind, weather and all the
circumstances of the case is reasonable, or by reason only of the ordinary incidents
of such flight.
40.No suit, prosecution or other legal proceeding shall lie against any person Protection of
for anythingdone in good faithor intended to be done under this Act. action takenin
good faith.
41.Nothing in this Act or in any order or rule made thereunder other than a Savings of
rule made under section 13 or under section 14 shall apply to or in respect of any application of
Act.
aircraft belonging to or exclusively employed in the Navy,Army or Air Force of
the Union or other armed forces of the Union constituted by any law for the time
being in force, or to any person in such forces employed in connection with such
aircraft:
Provided that any aircraft belonging to an armed forces of the Union other
than Navy, Army or Air Force of the Union, for which the provisions of the Act
which is repealed under section 43, and the rules made thereunder were applicable
on the date of commencement of this Act, shall continue to be so governed by this
Act and the rules made thereunder till such date as the Central Government may,
by notificationin the Official Gazette, specify.
42. (1) If any difficulty arises in giving effect to the provisions of this Act, Power to
the Central Government may, by order published in the Official Gazette, make such remove
difficulty.
provisions, not inconsistent with the provisions of this Act, as appear to it to be
necessary or expedient for removing the difficulty:
Provided that no such order shall be made after the expiry of a period of two
years from the date of commencement of the Act.
(2)Every order made under this section shall be laid, as soon as may be after
it is made, before each House of Parliament.
16 THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY [Part II— Sec. 1]
16
16
Repeal and 43.(1) The Aircraft Act, 1934 is hereby repealed. 22 of 1934.
savings.
Repeal and 43.(1) The Aircraft Act, 1934 is hereby repealed. 22 of 1934.
savings. (2) Notwithstanding the repeal of the Act referred to in sub-section (1),
anythi(n2g) Ndoontwe iothrs taannyd inacgt itohne traekpeena l oor f ptuhrep oArtcetd retofe rhraevde tob eienn sduobn-see cotri otna k(e1n),,
ainncyltuhdiningg daonnye r uolre , arneyg ualacttiioonn, ntaoktiefnic aotri opnu, ripnosprteecdt ioton ohra voerd bere emna ddeo noer iosrs uteadk;e onr,
ainncyl udliicnegn caen,y cruelreti,f irceagtuel,a taiopnp,r onvoatilf, icpaetiromni,s isniospne cotrio ne xoerm oprdtieorn m gardaen oterd i;s soure da; noyr
danoycu mliceennt coer, icnesrttriufimcaetnet, eaxpepcruotveadl;, opre armnyis sdiiornec toior n eixsesmuepdt;i oonr ganrayntperdo;c eoerd ianngys
tdaokceunm oern ta noyr ipnesntraultmy,e nptu neixsehcmuteendt;, ofor rfaeniytu rdei roecr tifoinne isimsupeods;e odr uanndyerp trhoec eAedcitn sgos
rtaekpeena leodr sahnayl l,p ienn asolt yf,a rp ausn iist hism neontt ,i nfcoorfnesiitsutreen to wr iftihn eth eim pproovseisdi ounnsd oefr tthhies AAcctt, bsoe
dreepeemaeledd t osh haallv,e i nb eseon f daor naes oitr itsa kneont iunncdoenrs tihstee ncot rwreitshp othned ipnrgo vpirsoivoinssio onfs tohfi st hAisc tA, cbte.
deemed to have been done or taken under the corresponding provisions of this Act.
(3) The mention of particular matters in sub-section (2) shall not be held to
prejud(i3c)e Tohre amffeenctti othne o fg epnaerrtiaclu alaprp mlicaattteiorsn ionf susebc-tsieocnt io6n o (f2 )t hseh aGlle nnoetr able C hlealuds etos
pArcetj,u 1d8ic9e7 ,o wr iathff reecgt atrhde tog ethnee reaflf eacptp olifc raetpioena l.of section 6 of the General Clauses 10 of 1897.
Act, 1897, with regard to the effect_ o_f_ r_e_p_e_a_l.__ 10 of 1897.
__________
The above Bill has been passed by the Houses of Parliament.
The above Bill has been passed by the Houses of ParliameDnRt.. RAJIV MANI,
Secretary to the Govt. of India.
Dated the Chairman.
Dated the Chairman.
__________
__________
I assent to this Bill.
I assent to this Bill.
Dated the President.
Dated the President.
UPLOADED BY THE MANAGER, GOVERNMENT OF INDIA PRESS, MINTO ROAD, NEW DELHI–110002
AND PUBLISHED BY THE CONTROLLER OF PUBLICATIONS, DELHI–110054.
MGIPMRND—312GI(S3)—11-12-2024.
