AS INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA
Bill No. 107 of 2025
THE INSOLVENCY AND BANKRUPTCY CODE (AMENDMENT)
BILL, 2025
A
BILL
further to amend the Insolvency and Bankruptcy Code, 2016.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Seventy-sixth Year of the Republic of India
as follows:––
1. (1) This Act may be called the Insolvency and Bankruptcy Code Short title and
(Amendment) Act, 2025. commencement.
(2) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by
5
notification in the Official Gazette, appoint:
Provided that different dates may be appointed for different provisions of this
Act and any reference in any such provision to the commencement of this Act shall
be construed as a reference to the coming into force of that provision.
2
Amendment of 2. In section 3 of the Insolvency and Bankruptcy Code, 2016 (hereinafter 31 of 2016.
section 3.
referred to as the principal Act),––
(a) in clause (31), the following Explanation shall be inserted,
namely:—
“Explanation.—For the removal of doubts, it is hereby clarified 5
that the security interest shall exist only if it creates a right, title or
interest or a claim to a property pursuant to an agreement or
arrangement, by the act of two or more parties, and shall not include a
security interest created merely by operation of any law for the time
being in force;”;
10
(b) after clause (31), the following clause shall be inserted, namely:––
‘(31A) “service provider” means an insolvency professional,
insolvency professional agency, information utility registered with the
Board, and any person falling within the category of persons notified by
the Central Government, for rendering services in relation to insolvency
15
and bankruptcy processes under the Code and is registered with the
Board;’.
3. In section 5 of the principal Act,––
Amendment of
section 5.
(a) clause (2A) shall be re-numbered as clause (2B) thereof and before
clause (2B) as so re-numbered, the following clause shall be inserted, 20
namely:––
‘(2A) “avoidance transaction” means a transaction as referred to in
sections 43, 45, 49 and 50;’;
(b) after clause (9), the following clause shall be inserted, namely:––
‘(9A) “fraudulent or wrongful trading” means the fraudulent or 25
wrongful trading as referred to in section 66;’;
(c) in clause (11), the following proviso shall be inserted, namely:––
“Provided that where multiple applications for initiation of the
corporate insolvency resolution process in respect of a corporate debtor
are pending before the Adjudicating Authority on the insolvency 30
commencement date, the initiation date shall be the date on which the
first such application was made before the Adjudicating Authority.”;
(d) in clause (26), in the Explanation, for the words “merger,
amalgamation and demerger”, the words “merger, amalgamation, demerger
and sale of one or more assets of the corporate debtor” shall be substituted;
35
(e) in clause (28), after the words “owed by the corporate debtor”
occurring at the end, the words “to the members of the committee of creditors
who are eligible to vote” shall be inserted.
Amendment of 4. In section 7 of the principal Act,––
section 7.
(a) in sub-section (4), the proviso shall be omitted; 40
(b) for sub-section (5), the following sub-section shall be substituted,
namely:––
“(5) The Adjudicating Authority shall, within fourteen days of the
receipt of the application under sub-section (2), by an order—
(a) admit the application, if it is satisfied that a default has
45
occurred and the application under sub-section (2) is complete, and
there is no disciplinary proceeding pending against the proposed
resolution professional; or
3
(b) reject the application, if it is satisfied that a default has
not occurred or the application under sub-section (2) is incomplete
or a disciplinary proceeding is pending against the proposed
resolution professional:
5 Provided that the Adjudicating Authority shall, before
rejecting the application under clause (b) of this sub-section, give
a notice to the applicant to rectify the defect in his application
within seven days from the date of receipt of such notice from the
Adjudicating Authority:
10 Provided further that if the Adjudicating Authority has not
passed an order under this sub-section within a period of fourteen
days from the date of receipt of the application under
sub-section (2), it shall record the reasons for such delay in writing.
Explanation I.––For the purposes of this sub-section, it is
15 hereby clarified that where the requirements under clause (a) have
been complied with, no other ground shall be considered to reject
an application filed under this section.
Explanation II.––For the removal of doubts, it is hereby
clarified that where a record of default in respect of a financial debt
20 owed to a financial institution recorded with the information utility
has been furnished along with the application filed by such
financial institution under this section, such record shall be
considered sufficient for the Adjudicating Authority to ascertain
the existence of default under this section.”.
25 5. In section 9 of the principal Act,–– Amendment of
section 9.
(a) in sub-section (3), in clause (e), for the words “such other
information, as may be prescribed”, the words “any other information, as may
be specified” shall be substituted;
(b) in sub-section (5), after the existing proviso, the following proviso
30 shall be inserted, namely:––
“Provided further that if the Adjudicating Authority has not passed
an order under this sub-section within a period of fourteen days from the
date of receipt of application under sub-section (2), it shall record the
reasons for such delay in writing.”.
35 6. In section 10 of the principal Act,–– Amendment of
section 10.
(a) in sub-section (3),––
(i) in clause (a), for the words “for such period as may be
specified;”, the words “and any other information, as may be specified;
and” shall be substituted;
40 (ii) clause (b) shall be omitted;
(b) in sub-section (4),––
(i) in clause (a), the words “and no disciplinary proceeding is
pending against the proposed resolution professional” shall be omitted;
(ii) in clause (b), the words “or any disciplinary proceeding is
45 pending against the proposed resolution professional” shall be omitted;
(iii) after the existing proviso, the following proviso shall be
inserted, namely:––
4
“Provided further that if the Adjudicating Authority has not passed
an order under this sub-section within a period of fourteen days from the
date of receipt of the application under sub-section (2), it shall record the
reasons for such delay in writing.”.
Amendment of 7. In section 11 of the principal Act, in clause (ba), after the words, figures 5
section 11. and letter “under Chapter III-A”, the words, figures and letter “or Chapter IV-A”
shall be inserted.
Substitution of 8. For section 12A of the principal Act, the following section shall be
new section for substituted, namely:––
section 12A.
Withdrawal of “12A. (1) Subject to sub-section (2), the Adjudicating Authority may 10
application allow the withdrawal of an application admitted under section 7, 9 or 10, on
admitted under
an application made by the resolution professional, with the approval of
section 7, 9 or
10. ninety per cent. voting share of the committee of creditors in such manner
as may be specified.
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in any law for the time being in 15
force, an application admitted under section 7, 9 or 10 shall not be withdrawn—
(a) before the constitution of the committee of creditors under
sub-section (1) of section 21; and
(b) after the first invitation for submission of a resolution plan has
been issued by the resolution professional. 20
(3) The Adjudicating Authority shall pass an order under sub-section (1)
within a period of thirty days from the date of receipt of the application:
Provided that if the Adjudicating Authority has not passed an order
within such period, it shall record the reasons for such delay in writing.”.
Amendment of 9. In section 14 of the principal Act,–– 25
section 14.
(a) in sub-section (1), for the words, brackets and figures “sub-sections (2)
and (3)”, the words, brackets, figures and letter “sub-sections (2), (2A) and (3)”
shall be substituted;
(b) in sub-section (3), in clause (b), the following Explanation shall be
inserted, namely:–– 30
“Explanation.––For the removal of doubts, it is hereby clarified
that the provisions of sub-section (1) shall also apply where the surety
seeks to initiate or continue any action or proceedings against the
corporate debtor pursuant to a contract of guarantee.”.
Amendment of 10. In section 16 of the principal Act,–– 35
section 16.
(a) for sub-section (2), the following sub-section shall be substituted,
namely:—
“(2) Where the application for corporate insolvency resolution
process is made by a financial creditor, the resolution professional, as
proposed in the application under section 7, shall be appointed as the 40
interim resolution professional, if no disciplinary proceedings are
pending against him.”;
(b) after sub-section (3), the following sub-section shall be inserted,
namely:—
“(3A) Where an application for the corporate insolvency resolution 45
process is made under section 10, the Adjudicating Authority shall make
a reference to the Board for the recommendation of an insolvency
professional who may act as an interim resolution professional.”;
5
(c)in sub-section (4), after the word, brackets and figure “sub-section (3)”,
the words, brackets, figure and letter “or sub-section (3A), as the case may be,”
shall be inserted.
11.In section 18 of the principal Act, in clause (b),–– Amendment of
section 18.
5 (a)after the words “submitted by creditors to him”, the words “in such
manner as may be specified” shall be inserted;
(b)the following Explanation shall be inserted, namely:—
“Explanation.––For the removal of doubts, it is hereby clarified
that the interim resolution professional, while collating the claims,
10 shall verify them, and, if required, determine the value of such
verified claims.”.
12.In section 19 of the principal Act,–– Amendment of
section 19.
(a) in the marginal heading, for the word “Personnel”, the word
“Persons” shall be substituted;
15 (b) for sub-section (1), the following sub-section shall be substituted,
namely:––
“(1) Any person who is or has been a personnel of the corporate
debtor or its promoter or associated with the management of the
corporate debtor, or engaged in a contract for service with the corporate
20 debtor, shall extend all assistance and cooperation to the interim
resolution professional as may be required by him for the purposes of
managing the affairs of the corporate debtor or performing the duties
conferred on him under this Chapter.”;
(c) in sub-section (2), for the words “any personnel of the corporate
25 debtor, its promoter”, the words, brackets and figure “any person referred to
in sub-section (1)” shall be substituted.
(d)in sub-section (3)––
(i)for the words “direct such personnel”, the words, brackets and
figure “direct such person referred to in sub-section (1)” shall be
30 substituted;
(ii) for the words “resolution professional”, the words “interim
resolution professional” shall be substituted;
(e) after sub-section (3), the following Explanation shall be inserted,
namely:—
35 “Explanation.—For the purposes of this section, it is hereby
clarified that references to the interim resolution professional shall also
include references to the resolution professional.”.
13. In section 21 of the principal Act, after sub-section (10), the following Amendment of
sub-section shall be inserted, namely:–– section 21.
40 “(11) Where the liquidation process of the corporate debtor is initiated
under Chapter III, the committee of creditors constituted under this section
shall also supervise the conduct of the liquidation process by the liquidator,
and the provisions of this section and section 24 shall apply to such liquidation
process under Chapter III as the context may require:
45 Provided that the Board may specify any other class or classes of
creditors, who may attend the meetings of the committee of creditors during
liquidation process, but shall not have any right to vote in such meetings.
6
Explanation.—For the purposes of Chapter III, it is hereby declared that
the provisions of sub-section (11) of this section, section 34A and
sub-section (2) of section 35, as amended by the Insolvency and Bankruptcy
Code (Amendment) Act, 2025, shall apply to––
(a) the liquidation process of a corporate debtor initiated after the 5
date of commencement of the Insolvency and Bankruptcy Code
(Amendment) Act, 2025; and
(b) the ongoing liquidation process of a corporate debtor as on such
date of commencement, where the liquidator has not made an application
under section 54, for which the committee of creditors shall continue for 10
the remainder of the liquidation process.”.
Amendment of 14. In section 22 of the principal Act, in sub-section (3), in clause (a), for the
section 22. words “it shall communicate its decision to the interim resolution professional, the
corporate debtor and the Adjudicating Authority”, the words “such person shall be
deemed to be appointed as the resolution professional from the date of such 15
resolution, and this decision shall be communicated to the interim resolution
professional, the corporate debtor, and the Board” shall be substituted.
15. In section 25 of the principal Act, in sub-section (2), for clause (j), the
Amendment of
section 25. following clause shall be substituted, namely:––
“(j) file an application to the Adjudicating Authority in respect of 2 0
an avoidance transaction or fraudulent or wrongful trading, if any; and”.
Substitution of 16. For section 26 of the principal Act, the following section shall be
new section for substituted, namely:—
section 26.
Application in “26. The filing of an application in respect of an avoidance transaction
respect of certain or fraudulent or wrongful trading or under section 47, shall not affect the 25
transactions or
proceedings of the corporate insolvency resolution process or the liquidation
trading not to
affect processes. process, as the case may be.
Explanation.––For the removal of doubts, it is hereby clarified that the
completion of the corporate insolvency resolution process or the liquidation
process shall not affect the continuation of proceedings in respect of an 30
avoidance transaction or fraudulent or wrongful trading or under section 47,
as the case may be.”.
Insertion of new 17. After section 28 of the principal Act, the following section shall be
section 28A. inserted, namely:––
Transfer of “28A. (1) Notwithstanding anything contained in this Code or any other 35
assets of
law for the time being in force, where a creditor of the corporate debtor has
guarantor of
taken possession of an asset of a personal guarantor or corporate guarantor of
corporate debtor
during process. the corporate debtor by enforcing its security interest over such asset under
any law for the time being in force which empowers the creditor to transfer
the asset, the creditor may, during the corporate insolvency resolution process 40
of the corporate debtor, permit the transfer of such an asset as part of its
insolvency resolution with prior approval of the committee of creditors in such
manner and subject to such conditions as may be specified:
Provided that where the corporate guarantor is undergoing a corporate
insolvency resolution process or the liquidation process, transfer of the asset 45
under this sub-section shall take place upon approval of the committee of
creditors of the corporate guarantor, by a vote of not less than sixty-six per
cent. of the voting share, and the amount received pursuant to the transfer shall
form part of the corporate insolvency resolution process or the liquidation
estate of the corporate guarantor, as the case may be: 50
7
Provided further that during the liquidation process of the corporate
guarantor, the approval of the committee of creditors under the first proviso is
required only where the creditor has relinquished such asset to the liquidation
estate under section 52:
5 Provided also that where the personal guarantor is undergoing an
insolvency resolution process or the bankruptcy process and the creditor has
forfeited or surrendered his right in relation to an asset, the transfer of such
asset under this sub-section shall take place upon approval by a majority of
more than three-fourths in value of the creditors of the personal guarantor, and
10 the amount received pursuant to the transfer shall form part of the insolvency
resolution process or the bankruptcy process of the personal guarantor, as the
case may be.
(2) The transfer of an asset referred to in sub-section (1) under a
resolution plan shall vest in the transferee all rights in, or in relation to the
15 asset, as if the transfer had been made by the owner of such asset.
(3) The amount received pursuant to the transfer of the asset shall be
adjusted towards the amount of debt owed by the guarantor in accordance with
the applicable law, subject to any costs, charges and expenses incurred in
respect of the preservation and protection of the asset before its transfer, and
20 where such amount is more than the debt owed, the surplus shall be paid to
the guarantor.”.
18. In section 30 of the principal Act, in sub-section (2),–– Amendment of
section 30.
(a) in clause (b), in the long line, the portion beginning with “, and
provides for the payment of debts of financial creditors”, and ending with
25 “liquidation of the corporate debtor” shall be omitted.
(b) after clause (b), the following clause shall be inserted, namely:––
“(ba) provides for the payment of debts of the financial creditors,
who do not vote in favour of the resolution plan, in such manner as may
be specified, which shall not be less than the lower of the amount––
30 (i) to be paid to such creditors in the event of a liquidation of
the corporate debtor under section 53; or
(ii) that would have been paid to such creditors, if the amount to
be distributed under the resolution plan had been distributed, in
accordance with the order of priority in sub-section (1) of section 53,
35 as the case may be.
Explanation I.—For the removal of doubts, it is hereby clarified
that a distribution in accordance with the provisions of this clause shall
be fair and equitable to such creditors.
Explanation II.—For the purposes of this sub-section, it is hereby
40 declared that the provisions of this sub-section as amended by the
Insolvency and Bankruptcy Code (Amendment) Act, 2025, shall not
apply to the corporate insolvency resolution process where any of the
following acts have first occurred,—
(i) the committee of creditors has approved a resolution plan
45 under sub-section (4) of section 30;
(ii) the committee of creditors has approved intimation to the
Adjudicating Authority to initiate the liquidation under
sub-section (2) of section 33; or
(iii) the Adjudicating Authority has passed a liquidation
50 order under sub-section (1) of section 33,
8
as the case may be, on and before the date of commencement of the
Insolvency and Bankruptcy Code (Amendment) Act, 2025;”.
(c) for clause (d), the following clause shall be substituted, namely:––
“(d) provides for the implementation and supervision of the
resolution plan, and provides for the constitution of a committee for this 5
purpose, subject to such conditions and in such manner as may be
specified;”.
Amendment of 19. In section 31 of the principal Act,––
section 31.
(a) in sub-section (1), after the existing proviso, the following proviso
shall be inserted, namely:–– 10
“Provided further that the Adjudicating Authority may, on an
application made by the resolution professional, with the approval of the
committee of creditors, by a vote of not less than sixty-six per cent. of
the voting share, in such form and manner, and subject to such
conditions as may be specified, first approve the implementation of the 15
resolution plan and thereafter approve the manner of distribution
provided therein within a period of thirty days from the date of approval
of implementation of such resolution plan.”;
(b) in sub-section (2), the following proviso shall be inserted, namely:—
“Provided that the Adjudicating Authority may, before rejecting 20
the resolution plan, give notice to the committee of creditors to rectify
any defects in the resolution plan.”;
(c) after sub-section (2), the following sub-section shall be inserted,
namely:—
“(2A) The Adjudicating Authority shall pass an order under 2 5
sub-section (1) or (2), within a period of thirty days from the date of
receipt of the resolution plan:
Provided that if the Adjudicating Authority has not passed an order
within such period, it shall record the reasons for such delay in writing.”;
(d) in sub-section (4), in the proviso, for the words “prior to the approval 30
of such resolution plan by the committee of creditors”, the words, brackets and
figures “before the resolution plan is submitted to the Adjudicating Authority
under sub-section (6) of section 30” shall be substituted;
(e) after sub-section (4), the following sub-sections shall be inserted,
namely:— 35
“(5) Notwithstanding anything contained in any other law for the
time being in force and subject to sub-section (6), where a resolution
plan has been approved under sub-section (1), a licence, permit,
registration, quota, concession, clearances or a similar grant or right
given by the Central Government, State Government, local authority, 40
sectoral regulator or any other authority constituted under any other law
for the time being in force, associated with such resolution plan, shall
not be suspended or terminated during the subsistence of the remaining
period of such grants or rights, if the corporate debtor or, if applicable,
the person whose resolution plan is approved under sub-section (1),
45
complies with the obligations in respect of the remaining period of such
grants or rights.
(6) Where the Adjudicating Authority approves the resolution plan
under sub-section (1),––
9
(a) unless otherwise provided in the resolution plan, any
claim, against the corporate debtor and its assets under any other
law for the time being in force, prior to the date of approval, shall
be extinguished; and
5 (b) no proceedings shall be continued or instituted against
the corporate debtor or its assets on the basis of such claims,
including proceedings for assessment of the claims.
Explanation I.––For the purposes of this section, it is hereby
clarified that nothing in this section shall affect a claim or any
proceeding in respect of a person who was a promoter or in the
10
management or control of the corporate debtor, a guarantor of the
corporate debtor or any person having a joint liability or a joint and
several liability with the corporate debtor, as the case may be.
Explanation II.––For the purposes of this section, it is hereby
15 clarified that if a person has a joint liability or a joint and several
liability with the corporate debtor for payment of debt owed to a
creditor before the approval of resolution plan, and such person
makes a payment for such debt after the approval of the resolution
plan, then any right of such person to be indemnified by the
20 corporate debtor shall be extinguished.”.
20. In section 33 of the principal Act,–– Amendment of
section 33.
(a) in sub-section (1),––
(i) in clause (a), the words and figures “or the fast-track corporate
insolvency resolution process under section 56” shall be omitted;
25 (ii) in clause (b),––
(I) in sub-clause (ii), after the words “in liquidation,”, the
word “and” shall be omitted;
(II) after sub-clause (iii), the following sub-clauses shall be
inserted, namely:—
30 “(iv) subject to the provisions of section 52, declare a
moratorium for the purposes referred to in clauses (a) and (c)
of sub-section (1) read with sub-section (3) of section 14,
which shall, mutatis mutandis, apply to the proceedings
under this Chapter:
35 Provided that provisions of this sub-clause shall not
apply to legal proceedings in relation to such transactions as
may be notified by the Central Government in consultation
with any financial sector regulator or any other authority; and
(v) pass an order appointing a liquidator for the
40 liquidation process in accordance with section 34.”;
(b) after sub-section (1), the following sub-sections shall be inserted,
namely:—
“(1A) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (1),
where the Adjudicating Authority is satisfied that the grounds mentioned
45 in clause (a) or clause (b) of sub-section (1) of this section exist, it shall,
before passing the liquidation order, consider an application made by the
committee of creditors, in such manner and subject to such conditions as
may be specified, by not less than sixty-six per cent. of the voting share,
for restoring the corporate insolvency resolution process, and after
50 considering such application, it may, by an order––
10
(a) if the ground mentioned in clause (a) of sub-section (1)
exists, restore the corporate insolvency resolution process to be
completed within such duration as it deems fit, but not exceeding
one hundred and twenty days; or
(b) if the ground mentioned in clause (b) of sub-section (1) 5
exists,––
(i) restore the corporate insolvency resolution process
to the stage of invitation for submission of a resolution plan,
which shall be completed in such manner and subject to such
conditions as specified; and 10
(ii) provide the duration for completion of such
restored corporate insolvency resolution process as it deems
fit, but not exceeding one hundred and twenty days.
Explanation.––For the purposes of this section, it is
hereby declared that on and from the date of 15
commencement of the Insolvency and Bankruptcy Code
(Amendment) Act, 2025, the provisions of
sub-sections (1A) and (1B) shall also apply to the corporate
insolvency resolution process of a corporate debtor initiated
under Chapter II before such date of commencement, where
20
the Adjudicating Authority has not passed a liquidation
order under sub-section (1) of this section, and shall not
apply where the liquidation order is passed.
(1B) The corporate insolvency resolution process of a corporate
debtor may be restored in accordance with sub-section (1A) only once. 25
Explanation.––For the purposes of this section, it is hereby
clarified that where the Adjudicating Authority does not receive a
resolution plan under sub-section (6) of section 30 within the period
provided under clause (a) or clause (b) of sub-section (1A) or rejects the
resolution plan received by it during such period under sub-section (2) 30
of section 31, it shall pass a liquidation order under sub-section (1).”;
(c) in sub-section (2),––
(i) after the word “liquidate”, the words “or dissolve” shall be
inserted;
(ii) for the brackets, letters and word “(ii) and (iii)”, the brackets, 35
letters and word “(ii), (iii), (iv) and (v)” shall be substituted;
(iii) for the words, brackets and figure “of sub-
section (1).”, the words, brackets, figures and letter “of sub-section (1)
or a dissolution order under sub-section (2A) of section 54, as the case
may be:” shall be substituted; 40
(iv) the following proviso shall be inserted, namely:––
“Provided that the committee of creditors shall, before taking the
decision to dissolve the corporate debtor, comply with such conditions,
as may be specified.”;
45
(v) in the Explanation, after the word “liquidate”, the words “or
dissolve” shall be inserted;
(d) after sub-section (2), the following sub-section shall be inserted,
namely:—
11
“(2A) The Adjudicating Authority shall pass a liquidation order
under this section within a period of thirty days from the date of receipt
of an intimation or application, as the case may be, to initiate the
liquidation process under this section:
5
Provided that if the Adjudicating Authority has not passed an order
within such period, it shall record the reasons for such delay in writing.”;
(e) in sub-section (3), for the brackets, letters and word “(ii) and (iii)”,
the brackets, letters and word “(ii), (iii), (iv) and (v)” shall be substituted;
(f) in sub-section (4),––
10 (i) for the words, brackets, letters and figure “sub-clauses (i), (ii)
and (iii) of clause (b) of sub-section (1)”, the words, brackets, letters and
figure “sub-clauses (i), (ii), (iii), (iv) and (v) of clause (b) of sub-section
(1) and pass any other order as it deems fit” shall be substituted;
(ii) the following proviso shall be inserted, namely:––
15 “Provided that where an application under sub-section (3) is
made, the Adjudicating Authority may, if it deems fit, reinstate the
corporate insolvency resolution process and pass appropriate
orders.”;
(g) sub-section (5) shall be omitted;
20 (h) for sub-section (6), the following sub-section shall be substituted,
namely:––
“(6) Where a liquidation order has been passed, no suit or other legal
proceeding shall be commenced, or if pending at the date of the liquidation
order, shall be proceeded with by the liquidator, on behalf of the corporate
25 debtor, except with the leave of the Adjudicating Authority and subject to
such terms as the Adjudicating Authority may impose.”.
21. In section 34 of the principal Act,–– Amendment of
section 34.
(a) for sub-section (1), the following sub-sections shall be substituted,
namely:––
30 “(1) The committee of creditors may, by a vote of not less than
sixty-six per cent. of the voting share, either resolve to––
(a) propose the resolution professional appointed for the
corporate insolvency resolution process under Chapter II or for the
pre-packaged insolvency resolution process under Chapter III-A,
35 subject to a written consent from the resolution professional in
such form as may be specified; or
(b) propose an insolvency professional, other than the
resolution professional, subject to a written consent from the
insolvency professional in such form as may be specified,
40 to be appointed as the liquidator for the purposes of the liquidation, as
the case may be and forward his name to the Adjudicating Authority,
within such period and in such manner as may be specified.
12
(1A) The Adjudicating Authority shall forward the name of the
proposed liquidator under sub-section (1) to the Board for its
confirmation and shall make such appointment after confirmation by
the Board.”;
(b) for sub-sections (3), (4), (5) and (6), the following sub-sections shall 5
be substituted, namely:––
“(3) Any person who is or has been a personnel of the corporate
debtor, or its promoter, or associated with the management of the
corporate debtor, or engaged in a contract for service with the corporate
debtor, shall extend all assistance and cooperation to the liquidator as 10
may be required by him for the purposes of managing the affairs of the
corporate debtor or performing the duties conferred on him under this
Chapter and the provisions of section 19 shall apply in relation to
liquidation and voluntary liquidation process as they apply in relation to
corporate insolvency resolution process with the substitution of 15
references to the liquidator for references to the interim resolution
professional and resolution professional and references to the corporate
insolvency resolution process with liquidation and voluntary liquidation
process, respectively.
(4) Notwithstanding anything contained in this section and 2 0
section 34A, the resolution professional appointed for the corporate
insolvency resolution process under Chapter II or pre-packaged
insolvency resolution process under Chapter III-A for a corporate
debtor, as the case may be, shall be disqualified from being appointed as
the liquidator, where the resolution plan submitted by the resolution 25
professional under sub-section (6) of section 30 was rejected for failure
to meet the requirements mentioned in sub-section (2) of section 30.
(5) Where the committee of creditors does not forward the name
of the proposed liquidator or the Board does not confirm the name of the
proposed liquidator, the Adjudicating Authority shall make a reference 30
to the Board for recommendation of an insolvency professional to be
appointed as the liquidator.
(6) The Board shall propose the name of an insolvency
professional along with written consent from the insolvency
professional, in such form as may be specified, within ten days of receipt 35
of a reference from the Adjudicating Authority under sub-section (5).”;
(c) in sub-section (7), the words “by an order” shall be omitted.
Insertion of new 22. After section 34 of the principal Act, the following section shall be
section 34A. inserted, namely:—
Replacement of “34A. (1) Where, at any time during the liquidation process, the 40
liquidator by committee of creditors is of the opinion that a liquidator appointed under
committee of
section 34 or this section is required to be replaced, it may, by a vote of not
creditors.
less than sixty-six per cent. of the voting share, resolve to replace the
liquidator with another insolvency professional, subject to a written consent
from such proposed liquidator in such form as may be specified. 45
(2) Where the committee of creditors resolves under sub-section (1) to
replace a liquidator, it shall apply to the Adjudicating Authority for the
appointment of the proposed liquidator, and if no disciplinary proceedings are
pending against him, the Adjudicating Authority shall, by an order, replace the
liquidator appointed under section 34 or this section and appoint the proposed 50
liquidator as the liquidator.”.
13
23. In section 35 of the principal Act,–– Am endment of
section 35.
(a) in sub-section (1),––
(i) for clause (a), the following clause shall be substituted,
namely:––
5
“(a) to maintain an updated list of claims of creditors in such
manner as may be specified;”;
(ii) in clause (j), the words “invite and” shall be omitted;
(iii) for clause (l), the following clause shall be substituted,
namely:––
10 “(l) continue or institute proceedings in respect of an
avoidance transaction or fraudulent or wrongful trading;”;
(iv) the following Explanation shall be inserted, namely:—
“Explanation.—For the purposes of this Chapter, it is hereby
declared that the provisions of clauses (a) and (j) of this
15 sub-section and sections 38 to 42 as amended by the Insolvency
and Bankruptcy Code (Amendment) Act, 2025, shall not apply to
the liquidation process and voluntary liquidation process initiated
on and before the date of commencement of the Insolvency and
Bankruptcy Code (Amendment) Act, 2025.”;
20 (b) for sub-section (2), the following sub-section shall be substituted,
namely:––
“(2) The committee of creditors shall supervise the conduct of the
liquidation process by the liquidator under Chapter III in such manner
as may be specified.”.
25 24. In section 36 of the principal Act, in sub-section (3), in clause (f), for the Amendment of
words “proceedings for avoidance of transactions in accordance with this Chapter”, section 36.
the words and figures “proceedings in respect of an avoidance transaction or
fraudulent or wrongful trading or under section 47” shall be substituted.
25. Sections 38, 39, 40, 41, and 42 of the principal Act shall be omitted. Omission of
sections 38 to 42.
30 26. In section 43 of the principal Act, in sub-section (4), in clauses (a) and (b),— Amendment of
section 43.
(i) for the words “period of”, the words “period starting from” shall be
substituted;
(ii) for the words “insolvency commencement date”, the words “initiation
date and ending on the insolvency commencement date” shall be substituted.
35 27. In section 46 of the principal Act,–– Amendment of
section 46.
(a) in the marginal heading, for the word “avoidable”, the word
“undervalued” shall be substituted;
(b) in sub-section (1),––
(i) for the words “avoiding a transaction at undervalue”, the words
40 “avoidance of an undervalued transaction” shall be substituted;
(ii) in clauses (i) and (ii),––
(A) for the words “period of”, the words “period starting
from” shall be substituted;
(B) for the words “insolvency commencement date”, the
45 words “initiation date and ending on the insolvency
commencement date” shall be substituted.
14
Substitution of 28. For section 47 of the principal Act, the following section shall be
new section for substituted, namely:—
section 47.
Application by “47. (1) Where—
creditors,
(a) a preferential transaction under section 43;
member or
partner in case
(b) an undervalued transaction under section 45; 5
of certain
transactions or
(c) an extortionate credit transaction under section 50; or
trading.
(d) fraudulent trading or wrongful trading under section 66,
has occurred and the liquidator or the resolution professional, as the case may
be, has not reported it to the Adjudicating Authority, a creditor, either by itself
or jointly with other creditors, a member, or a partner of the corporate debtor, 10
as the case may be, may make an application to the Adjudicating Authority to
pass orders in accordance with the respective provisions of this Chapter or
Chapter VI, as the case may be.
(2) Where the Adjudicating Authority, after examination of the
application made under sub-section (1), is satisfied that the relevant 15
transaction or trading under clause (a) or (b) or (c) or (d) of sub-section (1)
has occurred, it shall pass an order, for the avoidance of such transaction or
trading, as the case may be, as if such an application had been filed by a
liquidator or a resolution professional in accordance with the relevant
provisions of this Chapter or Chapter VI. 20
(3) After passing an order under sub-section (2), where Adjudicating
Authority is satisfied that the liquidator or the resolution professional, as the
case may be, after having sufficient information or opportunity to avail
information of such transaction or trading, did not report such transaction or
trading to the Adjudicating Authority, it shall pass an order requiring the 25
Board to initiate disciplinary proceedings against the liquidator or the
resolution professional, as the case may be.”.
Amendment of 29. In section 49 of the principal Act, in the proviso, in clause (a), after the
section 49. words “corporate debtor”, the words “or a related party of the corporate debtor, as
the case may be,” shall be inserted. 30
Amendment of 30. In section 50 of the principal Act, in sub-section (1), for the portion
section 50. beginning with “period within” and ending with “preceding”, the words “period
starting from two years preceding the initiation date and ending on” shall be
substituted.
Amendment of 31. In section 52 of the principal Act,––
35
section 52.
(a) for sub-section (2), the following sub-section shall be substituted,
namely:—
“(2) Where the secured creditor intends to realise the security
interest under clause (b) of sub-section (1), he shall inform the liquidator
of such security interest and identify the asset subject to such security 40
interest to be realised within a period of fourteen days from the
liquidation commencement date, and if he fails to do so, such security
interest shall be deemed to be relinquished to the liquidation estate:
Provided that where more than one secured creditor has any
security interest over an asset of the corporate debtor, no secured 45
creditor shall be entitled to realise its security interest, unless the
realisation is agreed upon by the secured creditors representing not less
than sixty-six per cent. of the value of all claims that are secured by
such security interests.”;
15
(b) for sub-section (8), the following sub-section shall be substituted,
namely:––
“(8) The amount of insolvency resolution process, costs and the
liquidation costs, and workmen’s dues as referred to in clause (a) and
5 sub-clause (i) of clause (b) of sub-section (1) of section 53,
respectively, shall be deducted from the proceeds of any realisation by
the secured creditors who realise their security interests in the manner
provided in this section, and they shall transfer such amounts to the
liquidator to be included in the liquidation estate in such manner,
10 within such period and subject to such conditions to secure the
payment as may be specified.”;
(c) after sub-section (9), the following Explanation shall be inserted,
namely:––
“Explanation.—For the purposes of this section, it is hereby
15 declared that the provisions of sub-section (2) as amended by the
Insolvency and Bankruptcy Code (Amendment) Act, 2025, shall not
apply to the liquidation process initiated on and before the date of
commencement of the Insolvency and Bankruptcy Code (Amendment)
Act, 2025.”.
20 32. In section 53 of the principal Act,–– Amendment of
section 53.
(a) in sub-section (1),––
(i) in clause (b), in sub-clause (ii), the following Explanation
shall be inserted, namely:––
“Explanation.––For the removal of doubts, it is hereby
25 clarified that where the value of the security interest relinquished
by the secured creditor is less than the total debt owed to such
secured creditor by the corporate debtor, he shall be a secured
creditor to the extent of the value of such security interest,
determined in such manner as may be specified, and for the
30 remaining value of such debt, he shall be considered to be an
unsecured creditor;”;
(ii) in clause (e), in sub-clause (i), the following Explanation
shall be inserted, namely:––
“Explanation.––For the removal of doubts, it is hereby
35 clarified that any amount, whether or not a security interest is
created to secure such amount, due to the Central Government
and the State Government, in respect of the whole or any part of
the period of two years preceding the liquidation commencement
date, shall be distributed under this sub-clause, and any
40 remaining amount, whether or not a security interest is created to
secure such amount, due to the Central Government and the State
Government, shall be distributed under clause (f);”;
(b) in sub-section (2), the following Illustrations shall be inserted,
namely:—
45 “Illustration I.––The workmen and the secured creditors of the
corporate debtor have a contractual arrangement which provides that
in the event of insolvency or liquidation of the corporate debtor, all
debt owed to the secured creditors shall be cleared before clearing any
debt owed to the workmen. Such a contractual arrangement shall be
50 disregarded.
16
Illustration II.––“X”, a secured creditor of the corporate debtor,
has a contractual arrangement with “Y”, another secured creditor of the
corporate debtor. As per the contractual arrangement, in the event of
insolvency or liquidation of the corporate debtor, the debt owed to “X”
shall be cleared before clearing any debt owed to “Y”. Such a contractual
5
arrangement shall not be disregarded.”.
Amendment of 33. In section 54 of the principal Act,––
section 54.
(a) for sub-section (1), the following sub-sections shall be substituted,
namely:––
“(1) The liquidator shall completely liquidate the assets of the 10
corporate debtor and make an application for its dissolution to the
Adjudicating Authority within a period of one hundred and eighty days
from the liquidation commencement date in such manner as may be
specified:
Provided that the Adjudicating Authority may, on an application 15
by the liquidator along with sufficient reasons, extend the stipulated time
by such period as it deems fit, but not exceeding a period of ninety days.
(1A) Where a proceeding in respect of an avoidance transaction or
fraudulent or wrongful trading or under section 47 is pending before an
application is made under sub-section (1) or a decision is made to 20
dissolve the corporate debtor under sub-section (2) of section 33, the
committee of creditors shall determine the manner of pursuing such
proceedings and the distribution of the proceeds arising out of such
proceedings, in such manner and subject to such conditions as may be
specified. 25
(1B) Where any suit or other legal proceeding against the corporate
debtor in respect of any proceeds to be distributed under section 53 is
pending before application is made under sub-section (1) or a decision
is made to dissolve the corporate debtor under sub-section (2) of
section 33, the committee of creditors shall make appropriate 30
arrangements for pursuing such suit or proceeding, and distribution of
proceeds to the parties in such suit or proceedings, in such manner and
subject to such conditions as may be specified.”;
(b) after sub-section (2), the following sub-sections shall be inserted,
namely:–– 35
“(2A) Without prejudice to the provisions of sub-section (2), the
Adjudicating Authority may, on receipt of the decision of the committee
of creditors to dissolve the corporate debtor under sub-section (2) of
section 33, order that the corporate debtor shall be dissolved from the
date of that order and the corporate debtor shall be dissolved 40
accordingly:
Provided that if, on the passing of an order under this sub-section,
any asset of the corporate debtor remains with it, such asset may be
disposed of in such manner as may be specified, and the proceeds thereof
shall be distributed for payment of the insolvency resolution process 45
costs and any surplus remaining after payment of such costs shall be
credited to the Insolvency and Bankruptcy Fund formed under
section 224.
(2B) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (2) and
sub-section (2A), the passing of the dissolution order shall not affect the 50
continuation of proceedings referred to in sub-section (1A) and (1B).”;
17
(c) in sub-section (3), after the words, brackets and figure
“sub-section (2)”, the words, brackets, figure and letter “or sub-section (2A)”
shall be inserted;
(d) after sub-section (3), the following sub-section shall be inserted,
5 namely:—
“(4) The Adjudicating Authority shall pass a dissolution order
under this section within a period of thirty days from the date of receipt
of the application under sub-section (1) or the intimation of the decision
of the committee of creditors to dissolve the corporate debtor under
10 sub-section (2) of section 33:
Provided that if the Adjudicating Authority has not passed an order
within such period, it shall record the reasons for such delay in writing.”.
34. In section 54A of the principal Act, in sub-section (2),–– Amendment of
section 54A.
(a) in clause (a), for the words “pre-packaged insolvency resolution
process or”, the words “pre-packaged insolvency resolution process or
15
creditor-initiated insolvency resolution process, or” shall be substituted;
(b) in clause (b), after the words “resolution process”, the words “or a
creditor-initiated insolvency resolution process” shall be inserted.
35. In section 54C of the principal Act, for sub-section (3), the following Amendment of
20 sub-section shall be substituted, namely:–– section 54C.
“(3) The corporate applicant shall, along with the application, furnish
such information as may be specified.”.
36. In section 54F of the principal Act, for sub-section (5), the following Amendment of
sub-section shall be substituted, namely:–– section 54F.
25 “(5) Any person who is or has been a personnel of the corporate debtor,
or its promoter, or associated with the management of the corporate debtor, or
engaged in a contract for service with the corporate debtor, shall extend all
assistance and cooperation to the resolution professional as may be required
by him to perform his duties and exercise his powers, and for such purposes,
the provisions of sub-sections (2) and (3) of section 19 shall, mutatis mutandis,
30
apply in relation to the proceedings under this Chapter.”.
37. In section 54L of the principal Act,––
Amendment of
section 54L.
(a) in sub-section (2), for the word, brackets and figure “and (4)”, the
brackets, figures and word “, (4), (5) and (6)” shall be substituted;
35 (b) in sub-section (3), the following proviso shall be inserted, namely:—
“Provided that the Adjudicating Authority may, before rejecting
the resolution plan, give notice to the committee of creditors to rectify
any defects in the resolution plan.”;
(c) in sub-section (4), in clause (b), for the brackets, letters and word
40 “(ii) and (iii)”, the brackets, letters and word “(ii), (iii), (iv) and (v)” shall be
substituted.
38. In section 54N of the principal Act, in sub-section (4), in clause (a), for Amendment of
section 54N.
the brackets, letters and word “(ii) and (iii)”, the brackets, letters and word “(ii),
(iii), (iv) and (v)” shall be substituted.
45 39. In Part II of the principal Act, Chapter IV shall be omitted. Omission of
Chapter IV of
Part II.
18
Insertion of new 40. After Chapter IV of the principal Act, the following Chapter shall be
Chapter IV-A in
inserted, namely:––
Part II.
“CHAPTER IV-A
CREDITOR-INITIATED INSOLVENCY RESOLUTION PROCESS
Corporate 58A. (1) A creditor-initiated insolvency resolution process may be 5
debtors eligible initiated in respect of the following corporate debtors under this Chapter,
for creditor-
namely:––
initiated
insolvency
(a) a corporate debtor with assets or income or both, below such
resolution
process. levels;
(b) a corporate debtor with such class of creditors or such amount 10
of debt; or
(c) such other category of corporate debtors,
as may be notified by the Central Government.
(2) Without prejudice to sub-section (1), a creditor-initiated insolvency
resolution process shall not be initiated in respect of a corporate debtor–– 15
(a) for which an insolvency resolution or liquidation proceeding
has been commenced and is still undergoing under the provisions of
Part II; and
(b) that has undergone a creditor-initiated insolvency resolution
process, pre-packaged insolvency resolution process or completed a 20
corporate insolvency resolution process, during the period of three years
preceding the creditor-initiated insolvency commencement date.
Initiation of 58B. (1) A financial creditor, belonging to such class of financial
creditor-initiated institutions as may be notified by the Central Government, in respect of which
insolvency
a default is committed by a corporate debtor, may initiate the creditor-initiated 25
resolution
process. insolvency resolution process for such corporate debtor by appointing a
resolution professional in accordance with the provisions of this section, and
subject to such conditions, as may be prescribed.
(2) The financial creditor seeking to initiate the creditor-initiated
insolvency resolution process shall, before appointing the resolution 30
professional,––
(a) obtain the approval of the financial creditors of the corporate
debtor belonging to the class of financial institutions notified under
sub-section (1), who represent not less than fifty-one per cent. in value
of the debt due to such financial creditors, in such manner as may be 35
specified;
(b) inform the corporate debtor of its intention to initiate the
creditor-initiated insolvency resolution process and give it a period of at
least thirty days to make any representation in such form and manner as
may be specified; and 40
(c) after consideration of the representation received under
clause (b), if any, where the financial creditor continues to pursue the
initiation of the process, it shall obtain approval of the financial creditors
of the corporate debtor belonging to such class as notified under
sub-section (1), who represent not less than fifty-one per cent. in value 45
of the debt due to such financial creditors, within a period of thirty days
from the date of receipt of the representation, in such manner as may
be specified:
19
Provided that where no approval is obtained under clause (c)
within the stipulated period of thirty days, the financial creditor shall, if
it seeks to initiate the creditor-initiated insolvency resolution process,
obtain fresh approval under clause (a) and comply with the procedure
5 under this sub-section.
Explanation.––For the purposes of this section, it is hereby clarified
that where the corporate debtor does not make a representation within the
period given by the financial creditor under clause (b), the financial creditor
may, after the expiry of such period proceed to appoint the resolution
10 professional in accordance with the provisions of sub-section (3).
(3) Where the financial creditor, who seeks to initiate the
creditor-initiated insolvency resolution process, meets the requirements under
sub-sections (1) and (2), it may appoint an insolvency professional as the
resolution professional, if no disciplinary proceedings are pending against
15 him, immediately after fulfilling all the requirements under sub-section (2).
(4) Where the resolution professional is appointed under sub-section (3),
he shall––
(a) make a public announcement of the initiation of the
creditor-initiated insolvency resolution process; and
20 (b) communicate the same along with a report confirming whether
the financial creditor meets the requirements under sections 58A and
58B, to the Adjudicating Authority and the Board,
within such period and in such form and manner as may be specified, and the
creditor-initiated insolvency resolution process shall be deemed to have
25 commenced from the date of such public announcement.
(5) Notwithstanding anything contained in sections 7, 9, 10 and 54C, no
application for initiation of the corporate insolvency resolution process or the
pre-packaged insolvency resolution process in respect of the corporate debtor
shall be filed or admitted during the creditor-initiated insolvency resolution
30 process period.
Explanation.––For the purposes of this Chapter,––
(i) “creditor-initiated insolvency commencement date” means the date
of the public announcement referred to in sub-section (4) of section 58B; and
(ii) “creditor-initiated insolvency resolution process period” means
the period beginning from the creditor-initiated insolvency
35
commencement date and ending on the date on which an order is passed
under sub-section (1) of section 58H or under sub-section (1) of
section 58-I or under section 58J read with section 31.
58C. (1) If the corporate debtor has any objection to the commencement Objections to
commencement
40 of the process under section 58B, it may file an application to the Adjudicating
of process.
Authority within a period of thirty days from the creditor-initiated insolvency
commencement date in such form and manner as may be specified,
accompanied with such fee as may be prescribed.
(2) Where the Adjudicating Authority, pursuant to an application under
45 sub-section (1) is satisfied that––
(a) a default has not occurred or both a default has not occurred
and the initiation of the creditor-initiated insolvency resolution process
was in contravention of section 58A or 58B, it may, by order, declare
the commencement of the process to be void ab-initio;
20
(b) a default has occurred, however, the initiation of the
creditor-initiated insolvency resolution process was in contravention
of sections 58A or 58B, it shall, convert the creditor-initiated
insolvency resolution process to corporate insolvency resolution
process and pass an order as referred to in sub-clauses (i) to (v) of 5
sub-section (1) of section 58H.
(3) The Adjudicating Authority shall pass an order under sub-section (2),
within a period of thirty days from the date of receipt of the application under
sub-section (1):
Provided that if the Adjudicating Authority has not passed an order 10
within such period, it shall record the reasons for such delay in writing.
Period for 58D. (1) Subject to sub-section (2), the creditor-initiated insolvency
completion of resolution process shall be completed within a period of one hundred and fifty
creditor-initiated
insolvency
days from the creditor-initiated insolvency commencement date.
resolution
process. (2) The Adjudicating Authority may, on the application made by the 15
resolution professional, with the approval of the committee of creditors, by a
vote of not less than sixty-six per cent. of the voting share, extend the period
under sub-section (1), by a period of not more than forty-five days:
Provided that any extension of the period of the creditor-initiated
insolvency resolution process under this section shall not be granted more 20
than once.
(3) Where no resolution plan is approved by the committee of creditors
within the period stipulated in sub-section (1) or the extended period under
sub-section (2), the Adjudicating Authority shall pass an order under
sub-section (1) of section 58H. 25
Duties and 58E. (1) The resolution professional, shall exercise and perform the
powers of
following powers and duties during the creditor-initiated insolvency
resolution
professional. resolution process period, in such manner and subject to such conditions as
may be specified, namely:––
(a) call for the submission of claims; 30
(b) prepare the information memorandum;
(c) prepare a report in such form as may be specified, confirming
whether the conduct of the creditor-initiated insolvency resolution
process is in accordance with the procedural requirements and that the
resolution plan, filed along with it, complies with the requirements of 35
sections 29A and 30 which shall, mutatis mutandis, apply to the
proceedings under this Chapter;
(d) duties referred to in clauses (a) to (c) of section 18 and
clauses (e) to (j) of sub-section (2) of section 25 which shall, mutatis
mutandis, apply to the proceedings under this Chapter; 40
(e) powers as referred to in sub-sections (3) and (4) of
section 54F which shall, mutatis mutandis, apply to the proceedings
under this Chapter;
(f) file such report and documents with the Board, as may be
45
specified; and
(g) perform such other duties, as may be specified.
21
(2) Any person who is or has been a personnel of the corporate debtor,
or its promoter, or associated with the management of the corporate debtor, or
engaged in a contract for service with the corporate debtor, shall extend all
assistance and cooperation to the resolution professional, as may be required
by him to perform his duties and exercise his powers, and for such purposes,
5
the provisions of sub-sections (2) and (3) of section 19 shall, mutatis mutandis,
apply in relation to the proceedings under this Chapter.
58F. (1) Subject to the provisions of this section, during the M a n a g e m e nt of
creditor-initiated insolvency resolution process period, the management of the affairs of
corporate
10 affairs of the corporate debtor shall continue to vest in the Board of Directors or debtors and
the partners, of the corporate debtor as the case may be, and the provisions of cooperation of
section 54H shall, mutatis mutandis, apply to the proceedings under this Chapter. its personnel.
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in any other law, from the
creditor-initiated insolvency commencement date, the resolution professional
shall attend meetings of members, Board of Directors and committee of
15
directors, or partners, of the corporate debtor, and he shall have the right to
reject any resolutions passed in these meetings, subject to such conditions and
in such manner as may be specified, and once he rejects a resolution, it shall
not be approved.
(3) The promoter and personnel of the corporate debtor shall provide
20
relevant information related to the corporate debtor for preparing the
information memorandum to the resolution professional in such form and
manner and within such period as may be specified, and where any person has
sustained loss or damage as a consequence of the omission of any material
25 information or inclusion of any misleading information or false information
provided by such persons, they shall be liable and in this regard, the provisions
of sub-sections (2) to (4) of section 54G and section 77A, shall, mutatis
mutandis, apply to the proceedings under this Chapter.
58G. (1) During the creditor-initiated insolvency resolution process Moratorium.
period, the resolution professional may, after obtaining the approval of the
30
committee of creditors, make an application to the Adjudicating Authority for
a moratorium for the purposes referred to in sub-section (1) read with
sub-section (3) of section 14, which shall, mutatis mutandis apply, to the
proceedings under this Chapter:
Provided that the resolution professional may file such application
35
before the constitution of the committee of creditors, after obtaining approval
of the financial creditors of the corporate debtor belonging to the class of
financial institutions notified under sub-section (1) of section 58B, who
represent not less than fifty-one per cent. in value of the debt due to such
40 financial creditors, in such manner as may be specified.
(2) Where an application has been made in sub-section (1), a moratorium
for the purposes referred to in sub-section (1) read with sub-section (3) of
section 14 shall commence from the date of the application and continue to be
in operation during the creditor-initiated insolvency resolution process period,
45 and the Adjudicating Authority may confirm the moratorium, if it is satisfied
that the moratorium is required for the proper and efficient conduct of the
creditor-initiated insolvency resolution process, or reject the application.
(3) The resolution professional shall make public announcement of the
following, in such form and manner as may be specified, namely:—
50 (a) filing of application under sub-section (1); and
(b) order of the Adjudicating Authority rejecting the application
under sub-section (2), if any.
22
Conversion of 58H. (1) Where the Adjudicating Authority,—
creditor-
initiated (a) does not receive a resolution plan for approval, within the
insolvency period stipulated under section 58D;
resolution
process to (b) is satisfied that the corporate debtor or its personnel have failed
corporate to assist or cooperate with the resolution professional; or 5
insolvency
resolution (c) rejects the resolution plan under sub-section (2) of section 58J
process. read with sub-section (2) of section 31,
it shall, by an order,––
(i) convert the creditor-initiated insolvency resolution process to
corporate insolvency resolution process under Chapter II and provisions 10
of such Chapter shall apply;
(ii) decide the stage from which the corporate insolvency
resolution process shall commence, after considering any
recommendation of the committee of creditors, made in such manner as
may be specified; 15
(iii) appoint the resolution professional for the creditor-initiated
insolvency resolution process, as the interim resolution professional or
the resolution professional for the corporate insolvency resolution
process, as the case may be;
(iv) declare a moratorium for the purposes referred to in section 14; and 20
(v) declare that the costs incurred during the creditor-initiated
insolvency resolution process, if any, shall be included as part of
insolvency resolution process costs for the purposes of the corporate
insolvency resolution process of the corporate debtor.
(2) Where the committee of creditors, at any time during the creditor- 25
initiated insolvency resolution process period, by a vote of not less than
sixty-six per cent. of the voting share, resolves to convert the creditor-initiated
insolvency resolution process to the corporate insolvency resolution process
in respect of the corporate debtor, the resolution professional shall make an
application for this purpose to the Adjudicating Authority in such form and 30
manner as may be specified, and the Adjudicating Authority shall pass an
order as referred to in sub-clauses (i) to (v) of sub-section (1).
(3) Where the Adjudicating Authority passes an order to convert the
creditor-initiated insolvency resolution process to the corporate insolvency
resolution process under Chapter II— 35
(a) the proceedings initiated for an avoidance transaction or
fraudulent or wrongful trading or under section 47, if any, during the
creditor-initiated insolvency resolution process shall continue during the
corporate insolvency resolution process;
(b) such order shall be deemed to be an order of admission of an 40
application under section 7 and the financial creditor who initiated the
creditor-initiated insolvency resolution process under section 58B, shall
be considered as the applicant for that purpose; and
(c) for the purposes of sections 43, 46 and 50, the references to
“initiation date and ending on the insolvency commencement date” shall 45
be construed as “creditor-initiated insolvency commencement date and
ending on the insolvency commencement date.”.
Withdrawal of 58-I. (1) Subject to sub-section (2), the Adjudicating Authority may
public allow the withdrawal of the public announcement made under sub-section (4)
announcement of section 58B and close the creditor-initiated insolvency resolution process 50
made under
on an application made by the resolution professional with the approval of
section 58B.
ninety per cent. voting share of the committee of creditors, in such manner as
may be specified.
23
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in any law for the time being in
force, the public announcement made under sub-section (4) of section 58B
shall not be withdrawn––
(a) before the constitution of the committee of creditors; and
5 (b) after the first invitation for submission of a resolution plan has
been issued by the resolution professional.
(3) The Adjudicating Authority shall pass an order under sub-section (1),
within a period of fourteen days from the date of receipt of the application:
Provided that if the Adjudicating Authority has not passed an order
10 within such period, it shall record the reasons for such delay
in writing.
58J. (1) Where the committee of creditors, by a vote of not less than Application for
approval of
sixty-six per cent. of the voting share, approves the resolution plan in
resolution plan.
accordance with the provisions of section 30, the resolution professional shall
submit such approved resolution plan to the Adjudicating Authority,
15
alongwith a report referred to in clause (c) of sub-section (1) of section 58E.
(2) On receipt of the resolution plan, the Adjudicating Authority, shall,
pass an order in accordance with the provisions of section 31, which shall,
mutatis mutandis apply, to the proceedings under this Chapter.
20 58K. (1) Save as provided in this Chapter, the provisions of A p p l i c ation of
sections 21, 24, 25A, 26, 27, 28, 28A, 29, 32, 32A, 43 to 51, and the
provisions of
provisions of Chapters VI and VII of this Part shall, mutatis mutandis apply,
Chapters II, III,
VI and VII to
to the creditor-initiated insolvency resolution process, subject to the this Chapter.
modifications that the references to––
25 (a) “corporate insolvency resolution process” shall be construed as
reference to “creditor-initiated insolvency resolution process”;
(b) “insolvency commencement date” shall be construed as
reference to “creditor-initiated insolvency commencement date”;
(c) “insolvency resolution process period” shall be construed as
30 reference to “creditor-initiated insolvency resolution process period”; and
(d) the references to “period starting from” shall be construed as
“period of” and “initiation date and ending on the insolvency
commencement date” shall be construed as “creditor-initiated
insolvency commencement date” under sections 43, 46 and 50.
35 (2) The creditor-initiated insolvency resolution process of a corporate
person under this Chapter shall meet such conditions and procedural
requirements as may be specified.’.
41. In section 59 of the principal Act,––
Amendment of
section 59.
(a) in sub-section (2), for the words “procedural requirements as may
40 be specified by the Board”, the words “procedural requirements, and be
completed within such period which shall not be more than one year, as may
be specified” shall be substituted;
(b) in sub-section (3), in clause (b), in sub-clause (ii), for the words “a
registered valuer”, the words and figures “a valuer registered under
18 of 2013. 45 section 247 of the Companies Act, 2013” shall be substituted;
(c) in sub-section (4), for the word “notify”, the word “inform” shall be
substituted;
(d) after sub-section (5), the following sub-sections shall be inserted,
namely:—
24
“(5A) Any time after the commencement of a voluntary liquidation
proceeding under sub-section (5) but before an application under
sub-section (7) is filed, the voluntary liquidation proceeding shall be
terminated if the following conditions are satisfied, namely:––
(a) the members of the company have passed a special 5
resolution for terminating the voluntary liquidation proceeding;
(b) where the company owes debt to any person on the date
of the resolution under clause (a), creditors representing two-thirds
in value of such debt have approved the resolution passed under
clause (a) within a period of seven days of such resolution; and 10
(c) such other conditions as may be specified.
(5B) The liquidator shall intimate the Board and the Registrar of
Companies regarding the special resolution under clause (a) of
sub-section (5A) within a period of seven days of passing the resolution
or subsequent approval of the creditors under clause (b) thereof, as the 15
case may be.
(5C) A voluntary liquidation proceeding shall be deemed to have
been terminated from the date on which the liquidator intimates the
Registrar of Companies under sub-section (5B), and such termination
shall bring the term of the liquidator to an end and have such other 20
consequences as may be specified.”;
(e) in sub-section (6), after the words “provisions of”, the words, brackets,
letter and figures “clause (b) of section 18 of Chapter II,” shall be inserted.
Insertion of new 42. In the principal Act, in Part II, after Chapter V, the following Chapter shall
Chapter VA. be inserted, namely:–– 25
‘CHAPTER VA
GROUP INSOLVENCY
Power to make 59A. (1) Notwithstanding anything to the contrary contained in this
rules for Code, the Central Government may, prescribe the manner and conditions for
initiating
proceedings for conducting insolvency proceedings under Part II, where these proceedings are 30
coordination and initiated against two or more corporate debtors that form part of a group.
cooperation of
corporate (2) Without prejudice to the generality of foregoing provision, such rules
debtors of group.
may, provide for all or any of the following matters, namely:––
(a) a common Bench for the insolvency proceedings of the
corporate debtors that form part of a group and the manner of the transfer 35
of pending proceedings of such corporate debtors to such Bench, and for
proceedings under the rules made under this section;
(b) coordination between the insolvency proceedings of the
corporate debtors that form part of a group, including the coordination
between their committee of creditors and interim resolution professionals, 40
resolution professionals, or liquidators;
(c) appointment and replacement of a common insolvency
professional to facilitate coordination between the insolvency
proceedings of the corporate debtors that form part of a group;
(d) formation of a committee comprising of the committee of 45
creditors of the corporate debtors that form part of a group;
25
(e) making of an agreement that provides measures to
coordinate and synchronise different aspects of the insolvency
proceedings of the corporate debtors that form part of a group, which
shall be binding on the corporate debtors approving the same including
5 their committees of creditors, and the Adjudicating Authority may issue
necessary orders to implement the approved agreement; and
(f) treatment of the costs incurred for taking measures to coordinate
the insolvency proceedings of the corporate debtors that form part of a
group.
10 (3) The rules made by the Central Government under this section may
provide that any of the provisions of the Code shall apply with such
modifications, as may be required to administer and implement the provisions
of this section.
Explanation.––For the purposes of this Chapter, the expressions––
15 (a) “control” includes the right to appoint majority of the directors
or other key managerial personnel entitled to manage the affairs of the
corporate person or to control the management or policy decisions
exercisable by a person or persons acting individually or in concert,
directly or indirectly, including by virtue of their shareholding,
20 management rights, ownership interest, shareholders agreements, voting
agreements, articles of association, limited liability partnership
agreements or in any other manner;
(b) “group” means two or more corporate debtors that are
interconnected by control or significant ownership, and include a
25 holding company, a subsidiary company and an associate company of a
corporate debtor, as defined under the Companies Act, 2013;
18 of 2013.
(c) “insolvency proceedings” means the corporate insolvency
resolution process and liquidation process under Part II of this Code;
(d) “significant ownership” includes the right to exercise
30 twenty-six per cent. or more voting rights.’
(4) Notwithstanding anything contained in section 241, a draft of
every rule proposed to be issued under this section, shall be laid before
each House of Parliament, while it is in session, for a total period of
thirty days which may be comprised in one session or in two or more
35 successive sessions, and if both Houses agree in disapproving the
issue of rule or both Houses agree in making any modification in the
rule, the rule shall not be notified or shall be notified only in such
modified form, as may be agreed upon by both the Houses of Parliament.
(5) The period of thirty days referred to in sub-section (4) shall not
40 include any period during which the House referred to in sub-section (4) is
prorogued or adjourned for more than four consecutive days.
(6) Every rule notified under this section shall be laid, as soon as may be
after it is made, before each House of Parliament.’.
43. After section 64 of the principal Act, the following section shall be Insertion of
45 inserted, namely:–– new section
64A.
26
Penalty for “64A. If any person has initiated a frivolous or vexatious proceeding
initiating
before the Adjudicating Authority under this Part, it may impose upon such
frivolous or
person a penalty which shall not be less than one lakh rupees, but may extend
vexatious
proceedings to two crore rupees.”.
under Part II.
Amendment of 44. In section 65 of the principal Act, in sub-section (3), for the words 5
section 65.
“pre-packaged insolvency resolution process” the words “pre-packaged insolvency
resolution process or creditor-initiated insolvency resolution process” shall be substituted.
Amendment of 45. In section 66 of the principal Act,––
section 66.
(a) in sub-section (1), after the words “resolution professional”, the
words “or the liquidator,” shall be inserted; 10
(b) in sub-section (2), after the words “during the corporate insolvency
resolution process”, the words “or by a liquidator” shall be inserted.
Amendment of 46. In section 67A of the principal Act,––
section 67A.
(a) in the marginal heading, for the words “pre-packaged insolvency
resolution process”, the words “pre-packaged insolvency resolution process or 15
creditor-initiated insolvency resolution process” shall be substituted;
(b) for the words “pre-packaged insolvency commencement date”, the
words “pre-packaged insolvency commencement date or creditor-initiated
insolvency commencement date” shall be substituted.
Amendment of 47. In section 96 of the principal Act, after sub-section (3), the following 2 0
section 96.
sub-section shall be inserted, namely:––
“(4) The provisions of this section shall not apply where an application
is filed for initiating an insolvency resolution process in respect of a personal
guarantor to a corporate debtor.”.
Amendment of 48. In section 99 of the principal Act,— 25
section 99.
(a) in sub-section (1), for the words “ten days”, the words “twenty-one
days” shall be substituted;
(b) in sub-section (10), for the words “or the creditor, as the case may
be”, the words “and the creditor” shall be substituted.
Amendment of 49. In section 106 of the principal Act,— 30
section 106.
(a) after sub-section (1), the following sub-section shall be inserted,
namely:—
“(1A) Where no repayment plan is submitted within the period
stipulated under sub-section (1), the resolution professional shall submit
a report to the Adjudicating Authority, and the Adjudicating Authority 35
shall pass an order terminating the insolvency resolution process of the
debtor and the debtor or the creditors shall be entitled to file an
application for bankruptcy under Chapter IV.”;
(b) after sub-section (3), the following sub-section shall be inserted,
namely:— 40
“(3A) Notwithstanding anything to the contrary contained in the
provisions of sub-section (2) and sub-section (3), where the repayment
plan is in respect of the debtor who is a personal guarantor to a corporate
debtor, the resolution professional shall summon the meeting of the
creditors by issuing a notice in writing specifying therein the date, time 45
and place of such meeting.”;
27
(c) in sub-section (4), after the words, brackets and figure “For the
purposes of sub-section (3)”, the words, brackets, figure and letter “and
sub-section (3A)” shall be inserted.
50. In section 121 of the principal Act, in sub-section (1),—
Amendment of
section 121.
5 (a) in clause (c), for the word and figures “section 118.”, the words and
figures “section 118; or” shall be substituted;
(b) after clause (c), the following clause shall be inserted, namely:—
“(d) where an order has been passed by an Adjudicating Authority
under sub-section (1A) of section 106.”.
10 51. In section 124 of the principal Act, after sub-section (3), the following Amendment of
sub-section shall be inserted, namely:— section 124.
“(4) The provisions of this section shall not apply where an application
is filed for initiating a bankruptcy process in respect of a personal guarantor to
a corporate debtor.”.
15 52. After section 164 of the principal Act, the following section shall be Insertion of new
inserted, namely:— section 164A.
“164A. Where the debtor has entered into an undervalued transaction as Transactions
referred to in sub-section (6) of section 164 and the Adjudicating Authority is defrauding
creditors.
satisfied that such transaction was deliberately entered into by such debtor—
20 (a) for keeping its assets beyond the reach of any person who is
entitled to make a claim against the debtor; or
(b) in order to adversely affect the interests of such a person in
relation to the claim,
the Adjudicating Authority shall make an order,—
25 (i) restoring the position as it existed before such transaction, as if the
transaction had not been entered into; and
(ii) protecting the interests of persons who are victims of such transactions:
Provided that an order under this section—
(a) shall not affect any interest in property which was acquired
30 from a person other than the debtor or his associate, as the case may be,
and was acquired in good faith, for value and without notice of the
relevant circumstances, or affect any interest deriving from such an
interest; and
(b) shall not require a person who received a benefit from the
35 transaction in good faith, for value and without notice of the relevant
circumstances to pay any sum, unless he was a party to the transaction.”.
53. In section 178 of the principal Act, in sub-section (1), in clause (d), the
Amendment of
following Explanation shall be inserted, namely:— section 178.
“Explanation.—For the removal of doubts, it is hereby clarified that any
40 amount, whether or not a security interest is created to secure such amount,
due to the Central Government and the State Government, in respect of the
whole or any part of the period of two years preceding the bankruptcy
commencement date, shall be distributed under this clause, and any remaining
amount, whether or not a security interest is created to secure such amount,
45 due to the Central Government and the State Government, shall be distributed
under clause (e);”.
28
Insertion of new 54. After section 183 of the principal Act, the following section shall be
section 183A.
inserted, namely:—
Penalty for “183A. If, any person has initiated a frivolous or vexatious proceeding
initiating before the Adjudicating Authority under this Part, it may impose upon such
frivolous or
vexatious person a penalty which shall not be less than one lakh rupees but which may 5
proceedings extend to two crore rupees.”.
under Part III.
Amendment of 55. In section 196 of the principal Act, in sub-section (1),—
section 196.
(a) for the words “insolvency professional agencies, insolvency
professionals and information utilities”, wherever they occur, the words
“service providers” shall be substituted; 10
(b) for the words “insolvency professionals, insolvency professional
agencies and information utilities”, wherever they occur, the words “service
providers” shall be substituted;
(c) in clause (c), the following Explanation shall be inserted, namely:—
“Explanation.—For removal of doubts, it is hereby clarified that the 15
levy of fee or other charges under this clause also includes any fee or other
charges levied by the Board in relation to the processes under this Code.”;
(d) after clause (s), the following clause shall be inserted, namely:—
“(sa) specify the standards of conduct of the committee of creditors
and its members while acting under Part II and Part III of this Code, as 20
the case may be;”;
(e) in clause (t), for the words “under this Code”, the words “for the
purposes of this Code” shall be substituted.
Amendment of 56. In section 208 of the principal Act, in sub-section (1), after clause (ca), the
section 208. following clause shall be inserted, namely:— 25
“(cb) creditor-initiated insolvency resolution process under Chapter IVA
of Part II;”.
Amendment of 57. In section 214 of the principal Act, in clause (e), after the words “such
section 214. information”, the words “in such manner as may be specified” shall be inserted.
Amendment of 58. In section 215 of the principal Act,— 30
section 215.
(a) for the marginal heading, the following marginal heading shall be
substituted, namely:—
“Submission and authentication of financial information to
information utilities.”;
(b) in sub-section (3), for the words “An operational creditor may”, the 35
words and figure “An operational creditor shall, before filing an application
under section 9 of the Code,” shall be substituted;
(c) after sub-section (3), the following sub-section shall be inserted,
namely:—
“(4) The corporate debtor or debtor, as the case may be, in respect 40
of whom any information is submitted under this section, shall
authenticate the information in such manner and within such period, as
may be specified:
29
Provided that where the corporate debtor or debtor does not
respond to the information submitted to the information utility in the
manner and period as has been specified, such information shall be
deemed to be authenticated.”.
5 59. In section 217 of the principal Act,— Amendment of
section 217.
(a) for the marginal heading, the marginal heading “Complaints against
service providers.” shall be substituted;
(b) for the words “an insolvency professional agency or insolvency
professional or an information utility”, the words “a service provider” shall be
10 substituted.
60. In section 218 of the principal Act,— Amendment of
section 218.
(a) for the marginal heading, the marginal heading “Investigation of
service providers.” shall be substituted;
(b) in sub-section (1), for the words “insolvency professional agency or
15 insolvency professional or an information utility”, occurring at both the places,
the words “service provider” shall be substituted.
61. For section 219 of the principal Act, the following section shall be Substitution of
substituted, namely:— new section for
section 219.
“219. Where the Board, upon completion of an inspection or Show cause
20 investigation under section 218 or on the basis of material available on record, notice to service
is of the prima facie opinion that sufficient cause exists to take action under provider.
section 220, it may issue a show cause notice to a service provider in such
manner, providing such period for giving reply, as may be specified.”.
62. In section 220 of the principal Act,— Amendment of
section 220.
25 (a) for sub-section (1), the following sub-section shall be substituted,
namely:—
“(1) The Board shall constitute one or more disciplinary
committees consisting of one or more persons from amongst its
Chairperson, whole-time members or officers not below the rank of
30 the Executive Director for the purposes of this section.”;
(b) after sub-section (1) as so substituted, the following sub-section
shall be inserted, namely:—
“(1A) The show cause notice issued under section 219 shall be
referred to a disciplinary committee constituted under sub-section (1).”;
35 (c) for sub-section (2), the following sub-section shall be substituted,
namely:—
“(2) Where the disciplinary committee, after giving the service
provider an opportunity of being heard, is satisfied that sufficient cause
exists, it may, impose a penalty as provided in sub-section (3), or
40 suspend or cancel the registration of the service provider, or direct
disgorgement under sub-section (4).”;
(d) in sub-section (3),—
(i) for the opening portion, the following opening portion shall be
substituted, namely:—
30
“Where any service provider has contravened any
provisions of this Code or rules or regulations made thereunder,
the disciplinary committee may impose penalty which shall
be up to—”;
(ii)in the proviso, for the words “more than one crore rupees”, the 5
words “two crore rupees” shall be substituted;
(e) in sub-sections (4) and (5), for the word “Board”, wherever it
occurs, the words “disciplinary committee” shall be substituted;
(f) after sub-section (6), the following sub-sections shall be inserted,
namely:— 10
“(7) Any person aggrieved by an order of the disciplinary
committee, under sub-sections (2) to (5), may prefer an appeal to the
National Company Law Appellate Tribunal within a period of thirty days
from the date of receipt of the order.
(8) The National Company Law Appellate Tribunal may, if it is 15
satisfied that a person was prevented by sufficient cause from filing an
appeal within thirty days, allow the appeal to be filed under
sub-section (7) within a further period not exceeding fifteen days.”.
Amendment of 63.In section 224 of the principal Act,—
section 224.
(a)in sub-section (2),–– 20
(a) in clause (c), after the words “any other source;”, the word
“and” shall be omitted;
(b)in clause (d), for the word “Fund.”, the words “Fund; and” shall
be substituted;
(c) after clause (d), the following clause shall be inserted, 25
namely––
“(e) amounts from such other sources as may be prescribed.”;
(b) for sub-section (3), the following sub-section shall be substituted,
namely:—
“(3) The sums credited to the Fund may be utilised— 30
(a) by a person who has contributed any amount to the
Fund under clause (b) of sub-section (2), in the event of
proceedings initiated in respect of such person under this Code
before an Adjudicating Authority, by making an application to
such Adjudicating Authority for withdrawal of funds not 35
exceeding the amount contributed by it, for making payment to
workmen, protecting the assets of such persons, meeting the
incidental cost during the proceedings or such purposes as may be
prescribed; and
(b) for such other purposes and in such manner as may be 40
prescribed.”.
Substitution of 64. For section 235A of the principal Act, the following section shall be
new section for substituted, namely:—
section 235A.
31
“235A. If a person has contravened any provision of this Code or any Power of
rules or the regulations made thereunder, the Adjudicating Authority may, on Adjudicating
an application made by the Board or the Central Government or any person Authority to
impose
authorised by the Central Government in this behalf, impose upon such person,
penalties.
5 a penalty which shall not be less than one lakh rupees for each day during
which the contravention continues, but which may extend up to—
(a) three times the amount of loss caused, or likely to have been
caused, to persons concerned on account of such contravention;
(b) three times the amount of the unlawful gain made on account
10 of such contravention,
whichever is higher:
Provided that where such loss or unlawful gain is not quantifiable, the
total amount of the penalty imposed shall not exceed five crore rupees:
Provided further that where the Adjudicating Authority is of the opinion
15 that sufficient cause exists to do so, it may, for reasons to be recorded in
writing, impose a penalty which may be less than one lakh rupees for each day
that the failure continues.
Explanation. I—For the removal of doubts, it is hereby clarified that the
Adjudicating Authority for the purposes of this section shall be the same as
20 referred to in section 60 or section 179, as the case may be.
Explanation. II—For the purposes of this section, it is hereby declared
that the amendment of this section by the Insolvency and Bankruptcy Code
(Amendment) Act, 2025 shall not affect:—
(i) any prosecution instituted under this section on and before the
25 date of commencement of the Insolvency and Bankruptcy Code
(Amendment) Act, 2025 and pending immediately before such date of
commencement before any court, which shall continue to be heard and
disposed of by the said court as if the Insolvency and Bankruptcy Code
(Amendment) Act, 2025 had not been enacted; and
30 (ii) any punishment imposed under this section on and before the
date of commencement of the Insolvency and Bankruptcy Code
(Amendment) Act, 2025.”.
65.In section 239 of the principal Act,— Amendment of
section 239.
(a) in sub-section (1), for the word “provisions”, the word “purposes”
35 shall be substituted;
(b)in sub-section (2),––
(i)clause (ea) shall be omitted;
(ii) after clause (fe), the following clauses shall be inserted,
namely:—
40 “(ff) the conditions under sub-section (1) of section 58B;
(fg) the fee for filing an objection under sub-section (1) of
section 58C;
(fh) the manner and conditions under sub-section (1) of
section 59A;”;
45 (iii) for clause (zi), the following clause shall be substituted,
namely:—
32
“(zi) the other sources of amounts to be credited to
the Insolvency and Bankruptcy Fund under clause (e) of
sub-section (2) of section 224;”;
(iv) after clause (zi) as so substituted, the following clauses shall
be inserted, namely:— 5
“(zia) the purposes under clause (a) of sub-section (3) of
section 224;
(zib) the other purposes and the manner under clause (b) of
sub-section (3) of section 224;”;
(v) after clause (zm), the following clause shall be inserted, 10
namely:—
“(zma) the manner and conditions under sub-section (1) of
section 240C;”.
Amendment of 66. In section 240 of the principal Act,—
section 240.
(a) in sub-section (1), for the word “provisions”, the word “purposes” 15
shall be substituted;
(b) in sub-section (2),––
(i) after clause (f), the following clause shall be inserted, namely:—
“(fa) other information under clause (e) of sub-section (3) of
section 9;”; 20
(ii) for clause (h), the following clause shall be substituted, namely:—
“(h) the other document or any other information under
clause (a) of sub-section (3) of section 10;”;
(iii) after clause (h), the following clause shall be inserted,
namely:— 25
“(ha) the manner under sub-section (1) of section 12A;”;
(iv) in clause (n), after the words, brackets and letter “of
clause (a),” the words, brackets and letter “the manner under clause (b),”
shall be inserted;
30
(v) after clause (o), the following clause shall be inserted, namely:—
“(oa) any other class or classes of creditors who may attend
the meetings of committee of creditors under the proviso to
sub-section (11) of section 21;”;
(vi) after clause (t), the following clause shall be inserted, namely:—
“(ta) the manner and conditions under sub-section (1) of 35
section 28A;”;
(vii) in clause (w), for the words, brackets, letters and figures “the
manner of payment of debts under clause (b), and the other requirements
to which a resolution plan shall conform to under clause (d) of
sub-section (2) of section 30;”, the words, brackets, letters and figures 40
“the manner of payment of debts of operational creditors under
clause (b), the manner of payment of debts of financial creditors who do
not vote in favour of the resolution plan under clause (ba), the conditions
and manner for constitution of a committee under clause (d) and the
other requirements to which a resolution plan shall conform to under 45
clause (f) of sub-section (2) of section 30;” shall be substituted;
33
(viii) after clause (wa), the following clauses shall be inserted,
namely:—
“(wb) the form, manner and the conditions under the second
proviso to sub-section (1) of section 31;
5 (wc) the manner and conditions for making an application
by the committee of creditors for restoring the corporate
insolvency resolution process and manner and conditions for
completing the restored corporate insolvency resolution process
under sub-section (1A) of section 33;
10 (wd) the conditions under the proviso to sub-section (2) of
section 33;”;
(ix) for clause (x), the following clause shall be substituted, namely:—
“(x) the period within which and the manner in which the
committee of creditors shall forward the name of the proposed
resolution professional or the proposed insolvency professional to
15
be appointed as the liquidator to the Adjudicating Authority, the
form of written consent from the resolution professional under
clause (a) and the form of written consent from the insolvency
professional under clause (b) of sub-section (1) of section 34;”;
20 (x) after clause (x) as so substituted, the following clauses shall be
inserted, namely:—
“(xa) the form of written consent from insolvency
professional under sub-section (6) of section 34;
(xb) the fee for the conduct of the liquidation proceedings and
25 proportion to the value of the liquidation estate assets under
sub-section (8) of section 34;
(xc) the form for giving written consent under sub-section (1)
of section 34A;”;
(xi) in clause (y), for the words, brackets and letter “the manner of
30 evaluating the assets and property of the corporate debtor under
clause (c)”, the words, brackets and letters “the manner of maintaining
an updated list of claims of creditors under clause (a), the manner of
evaluating the assets and property of the corporate debtor under
clause (c)” shall be substituted;
35 (xii) for clause (z), the following clause shall be substituted,
namely:––
“(z) the manner in which the committee of creditors shall
supervise the conduct of the liquidation process by the liquidator
under sub-section (2) of section 35;”;
40 (xiii) clauses (ze), (zf) and (zg) shall be omitted;
(xiv) after clause (zi), the following clause shall be inserted,
namely:––
“(zia) the manner, period and conditions under
sub-section (8) of section 52;”;
45 (xv) after clause (zj), the following clauses shall be inserted,
namely:—
“(zja) the period and the manner of distribution of proceeds
of sale under sub-section (1) of section 53;
34
(zjb) the manner of determining the value of security interest
under the Explanation to sub-clause (ii) of clause (b) of
sub-section (1) of section 53;
(zjc) the manner in which the liquidator shall make an
application to the Adjudicating Authority for the dissolution of the 5
corporate debtor under sub-section (1) of section 54;
(zjd) the manner and conditions under sub-section (1A) of
section 54;
(zje) the manner and conditions under sub-section (1B) of
section 54;”; 10
(xvi) for clause (zk), the following clause shall be substituted,
namely:––
“(zk) the manner under the proviso to sub-section (2A) of
section 54;”;
(xvii) for clause (zke), the following clause shall be substituted, 15
namely:—
“(zke) the information to be furnished under sub-section (3)
of section 54C;”;
(xviii) clause (zl) shall be omitted;
(xix) after clause (zl) as so omitted, the following clauses shall be 20
inserted, namely:—
“(zla) the manner under clause (a), the form and manner
under clause (b), and the manner under clause (c) of sub-section
(2) of section 58B;
(zlb) the period, form and manner under sub-section (4) of 25
section 58B;
(zlc) the form and manner under sub-section (1) of
section 58C;
(zld) the manner and conditions for exercising the
powers and performing duties by the resolution professional 3 0
under section 58E;
(zle) the form in which the report to be prepared under
clause (c), the report and documents to be filed with the Board
under clause (f), and such other duties to be performed under clause
(g) of section 58E; 35
(zlf) the conditions and manner for the resolution
professional to attend the meetings and exercise the right to
reject under sub-section (2) and the form, manner and period under
sub-section (3) of section 58F;
(zlg) the manner under the proviso to sub-section (1) of 40
section 58G;
(zlh) the form and manner in which the resolution
professional shall make public announcement under
sub-section (3) of section 58G;
(zli) the manner under sub-clause (ii) of sub-section (1) of 45
section 58H;
35
(zlj) the form and manner under sub-section (2) of
section 58H;
(zlk) the manner under sub-section (1) of section 58-I;
(zll) the conditions and procedural requirements under
5 sub-section (2) of section 58K;”;
(xx) in clause (zm), for the words “conditions and procedural
requirements”, the words “conditions, procedural requirements, and
period” shall be substituted;
(xxi) after clause (zm), the following clauses shall be inserted,
10 namely:—
“(zma) the other conditions under clause (c) of
sub-section (5A) of section 59;
(zmb) the other consequences under sub-section (5C) of
section 59;”;
15 (xxii) in clause (zv), after the words, brackets and letter “utilities
under clause (r),” the words, brackets and letters “standards of conduct
of the committee of creditors and its members under clause (sa),” shall
be inserted;
(xxiii) after clause (zzs), the following clause shall be inserted,
20 namely:—
“(zzsa) the manner under clause (e) of section 214;”;
(xxiv) after clause (zzw), the following clause shall be inserted,
namely:—
“(zzwa) the manner and period under sub-section (4) of
25 section 215;”;
(xxv) for clause (zzza), the following clause shall be substituted
namely:—
“(zzza) the manner and period under section 219;”.
67. After section 240A of the principal Act, the following sections shall be Insertion of new
30 inserted, namely:–– sections 240B
and 240C.
“240B. Notwithstanding anything to the contrary contained in this Code,
Electronic portal
the Central Government may, by notification, provide an electronic portal and for facilitating
the procedures related to the insolvency and bankruptcy processes under this procedures.
Code, which shall be carried out on such electronic portal.
35 240C. (1) Notwithstanding anything to the contrary contained in this Power to make
18 of 2013. Code and the Companies Act, 2013, the Central Government may prescribe rules for cross-
the manner and conditions for administering and conducting cross-border
border
insolvency.
insolvency proceedings under the Code, for such class or classes of debtors
and corporate debtors as may be notified by the Central Government.
40 (2) The rules made under this section may provide that any of the
18 of 2013. provisions of this Code or the Companies Act, 2013 shall apply with such
exceptions, modifications and adaptations, as may be required to administer
and implement the provisions of this section and rules made thereunder,
including designating one or more Benches for dealing with proceedings under
45 this section.
(3) A draft of every rule proposed under this section shall be laid before
each House of Parliament in such manner as provided under sub-sections (4)
to (6) of section 59A, which shall, mutatis mutandis apply, to the rules made
under this section.”.
36
Amendment of 68. In section 242 of the principal Act, after sub-section (1), the following
section 242. sub-section shall be inserted, namely:––
“(1A) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (1), if any
difficulty arises in giving effect to the provisions of this Code, as amended by
the Insolvency and Bankruptcy Code (Amendment) Act, 2025, the Central 5
Government may, by an order published in the Official Gazette, make such
provisions not inconsistent with the provisions of this Code, as may appear to
it to be necessary or expedient for removing such difficulty:
Provided that no such order shall be made under this section after the
expiry of a period of five years from the date of commencement of the 10
Insolvency and Bankruptcy Code (Amendment) Act, 2025.”.
37
STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
The Insolvency and Bankruptcy Code, 2016 (the Code) was enacted to
consolidate and amend the laws relating to reorganisation and insolvency resolution
of corporate persons, partnership firms and individuals in a time bound manner for
maximisation of value of assets of such persons, to promote entrepreneurship,
availability of credit and balance the interests of all the stakeholders including
alteration in the order of priority of payment of Government dues and to establish
an Insolvency and Bankruptcy Board of India (Board) and for matters connected
therewith or incidental thereto.
2. The primary objective of the Code is to resolve insolvency and bankruptcy
cases in a time bound manner for maximisation of value of assets of individuals,
partnership firms and corporate persons. The Code, as an economic legislation,
requires periodic updates to align with changing market needs and lessons learnt
from practical experience. Over the past three years, extensive stakeholder
consultations have been undertaken. Issues arising in the implementation of the
Code and new concepts were discussed in a colloquium with key stakeholders held
in November, 2022, followed by deliberations in the Insolvency Law Committee in
January, 2023. Subsequently, the Government issued a discussion paper inviting
public comments on proposed changes to the Code. The Government examined the
public and stakeholder comments, as well as recommendations from the colloquium
and the Committee, and decided to amend the Code to improve its operation,
enhance its effectiveness, clarify its original intent and incorporate novel concepts.
3. In view of the above, it has become necessary to amend certain provisions of
the Code and to insert certain new provisions for effective implementation of the
Code. The proposed amendments aim to reduce delays, maximise value for all
stakeholders, and improve governance of all processes under the Code. They seek to
modify existing provisions to better align with the overall objectives of the Code and
to introduce new provisions that follow global best practices for resolving insolvency.
4. Among other measures, the proposed legislation introduces a “creditor-
initiated insolvency resolution process” with an out-of-court initiation mechanism
for genuine business failures to facilitate faster and more cost-effective insolvency
resolution, with minimal business disruption. Once implemented, this will help ease
the burden on judicial systems, promote ease of doing business and improve access
to credit. The proposed legislation also introduces provisions for “group
insolvency” and “cross-border insolvency”.
5. The group insolvency framework seeks to efficiently resolve insolvencies
involving complex corporate group structures, minimising value destruction caused
by fragmented proceedings and maximising value for creditors through coordinated
decision-making.
6. The cross-border insolvency framework seeks to lay the foundation for
protecting stakeholder interests in domestic and foreign proceedings, promoting
investor confidence and aligning domestic practices with international best
practices. This will also pave the way for improved recognition of Indian insolvency
proceedings in other jurisdictions.
7. The Notes on Clauses explain in detail the various provisions contained in
the Bill.
8. The Bill seeks to achieve the above objectives.
NEW DELHI; NIRMALA SITHARAMAN.
The 12th August, 2025.
37
38
Notes on clauses
Clause 1 provides for the short title and commencement of the proposed
legislation, and enforcement of the various sections of the proposed legislation on
different dates.
Clause 2 of the Bill seeks to amend section 3 of the Insolvency and Bankruptcy
Code, 2016 (‘Code’).
It seeks to insert an explanation in clause (31) of section 3 of the Code to
clarify that security interest shall exist only when it creates a right, title or interest
or a claim to a property pursuant to an agreement or arrangement by the act of two
or more parties and shall not include a security interest created merely by operation
of any law for the time being in force. Hence, a provision in central or state
legislation or a subordinate law that states that a charge will be made on the property
of the corporate debtor for non-payment of tax or a penalty shall not be considered
a security interest. A security interest shall only exist where the parties to an
agreement or arrangement agree to create a right, title or interest or a claim to a
property, whether or not it is in writing. For instance, a charge created over the
property of the corporate debtor to secure the financial debt under an agreement, or
an arrangement where a mortgage is created by deposit of title deeds of its property
between two or more persons.
It also seeks to insert a definition of the term ‘service provider’ to include an
insolvency professional, insolvency professional agency, information utility registered
with the Insolvency and Bankruptcy Board of India (‘Board’), and other persons notified
by the Central Government for rendering services in relation to the insolvency and
bankruptcy processes under the Code. It enables the Central Government to notify
additional categories of persons whose services are required for the implementation of
the Code, thereby empowering the Board to regulate them for the efficient and proper
conduct of the insolvency and bankruptcy processes. The notified category of persons
will be required to register with the Board for rendering services in relation to the
insolvency and bankruptcy processes under the Code, and after registration, they will be
required to abide by the specifications laid down by the Board concerning the rendition
of services along with its enforcement and disciplinary processes.
Clause 3 of the Bill seeks to amend section 5 of the Code, to insert definitions
of the phrases ‘avoidance transaction’ and ‘fraudulent or wrongful trading’ for ease
of reference at multiple places in the Code.
Further, it seeks to insert a proviso to clause (11) of section 5 of the Code. It
clarifies that if multiple applications to initiate the corporate insolvency resolution
process in respect of a corporate debtor are pending before the Adjudicating Authority
on the insolvency commencement date, and it admits one of them, then the initiation
date for the corporate insolvency resolution process of such corporate debtor shall be the
date on which the first such application was made before the Adjudicating Authority.
The Adjudicating Authority, while passing the order for the commencement of the
corporate insolvency resolution process, may mention the initiation date in its order in
the interest of certainty, based on the rightful first application that was made against the
corporate debtor and pending on the insolvency commencement date.
Additionally, it seeks to amend the explanation to clause (26) of section 5 to
clarify that the restructuring of the corporate debtor may also include the sale of one
or more its assets. It enables the invitation of plans specifically for one or more
assets of the corporate debtor of complex businesses that can be included in the
resolution plan providing for the insolvency resolution of the corporate debtor. The
resolution applicants to whom such assets are being sold will also need to comply
with the eligibility requirements under the Code. This amendment will allow the
committee of creditors to adopt the best commercially viable resolution plan for
resolving the insolvency of a corporate debtor and ensure the value maximisation of
its assets.
38
39
It also seeks to amend the definition of ‘voting share’ under clause (28) of
section 5 to clarify that ‘voting share’ will be computed on the basis of financial
debt owed to only the members of the committee of creditors who are eligible to
vote as per section 21, which excludes financial creditors that are related parties of
the corporate debtor from voting. Hence, it is clarified that the financial debt owed
to the creditors who are not eligible to vote in the committee of creditors shall not
be included when determining the voting share.
Clause 4 of the Bill seeks to amend section 7 of the Code to clarify that the
Adjudicating Authority shall mandatorily admit the application to initiate the
corporate insolvency resolution process once the occurrence of default is
established, no disciplinary proceedings are pending against the proposed resolution
professional and other procedural requirements under the section are complied with.
Additionally, an explanation is inserted to clarify that the Adjudicating Authority
shall not consider any other grounds to reject the application where the requirements
of these provisions have been complied with. Where the procedural requirements
are fulfilled, the Adjudicating Authority must only ascertain whether a default
exceeding the threshold of section 4 exists and admit the application. Another
explanation is inserted to clarify that when a financial creditor, which is a financial
institution, submits a record of default in respect of a financial debt owed to such
creditor, along with its application under this section, the Adjudicating Authority
shall consider it sufficient to ascertain the existence of default. Given that financial
institutions, as a regulated entity, maintain their records and financial information
with information utilities in a structured and reliable manner, it would be appropriate
for the Adjudicating Authority to rely on such records to ascertain the occurrence of
default and promptly admit the application, within fourteen days of receipt of
application.
Further, the proviso to sub-section (4) of section 7 is omitted, and the period
of fourteen days for deciding the application under this section is clearly provided
in sub-section (5) of section 7, which will also include the period for ascertaining
the occurrence of default. Where the application is not decided within this period,
the Adjudicating Authority will record reasons for such delay in writing. Within this
period, the Adjudicating Authority shall also give notice to rectify any defects in not
more than seven days before rejecting the application.
Clause 5 of the Bill seeks to amend clause (e) of sub-section (3) of section 9
of the Code to empower the Board to specify by regulation any other type of
information that the operational creditor must submit along with the application for
initiation of the corporate insolvency resolution process. It also seeks to insert a
proviso in sub-section (5) of section 9 to provide that where the application filed
under this provision is not decided within fourteen days, the Adjudicating Authority
will record reasons for such delay in writing.
Clause 6 of the Bill seeks to amend clause (a) of sub-section (3) of section 10 of
the Code to broaden the powers of the Board to specify any other type of information
that may be furnished along with the application for commencement of corporate
insolvency resolution process by a corporate applicant. It also seeks to amend section
10 to abrogate the right of the corporate debtor to propose an interim resolution
professional under an application filed under this section. This seeks to eliminate the
possibility of bias in the appointment of the interim resolution professional, thereby
ensuring the impartial discharge of duties and maintaining the confidence of creditors in
the process. It also seeks to insert a proviso in sub-section (4) of section 10, to provide
that where the application is not decided within fourteen days, the Adjudicating
Authority will record reasons for such delay in writing.
Clause 7 of the Bill seeks to amend section 11 of the Code as a consequential
amendment pursuant to the insertion of the creditor-initiated insolvency resolution
process under Chapter IV-A of Part II of the Code.
40
Clause 8 of the Bill seeks to substitute section 12A of the Code to provide that
the Adjudicating Authority may allow an application admitted under section 7, 9, or
10 to be withdrawn on an application made by the resolution professional with the
prior approval of ninety per cent. of the voting share of the committee of creditors.
The consent of the applicant who made these applications will not be required at the
stage of filing the application for withdrawal, and he shall be provided an
opportunity for hearing during the adjudication of this application before the
Adjudicating Authority. Further, it clarifies that the Adjudicating Authority shall
not allow the application admitted under section 7, 9, or 10 to be withdrawn either
before the committee of creditors is constituted under section 21 of the Code or after
the first invitation to submit a resolution plan by the resolution professional under
any circumstances. Additionally, a period of thirty days is provided for the
Adjudicating Authority to decide the withdrawal application. If the application is
not decided within thirty days, the Adjudicating Authority is required to record
reasons for such delay in writing.
Clause 9 of the Bill seeks to amend sub-section (1) of section 14 of the Code
to clarify that the applicability of the moratorium under sub-section (1) shall also be
subject to sub-section (2A) of section 14. It also seeks to insert an explanation into
clause (b) of sub-section (3) of section 14 to clarify that the moratorium shall apply
where the surety seeks to initiate or continue any action or proceedings pursuant to
a contract of guarantee against the corporate debtor undergoing the corporate
insolvency resolution process. Hence, the moratorium under section 14 will apply
against the surety where, it seeks to initiate a proceedings against the corporate
debtor pursuant to its right of subrogation in contravention of sub-section (1) of
section 14. If the surety has any claims against the corporate debtor, it should submit
them during the process like other creditors.
Clause 10 of the Bill seeks to amend section 16 of the Code as a consequence
of the amendments to section 10, wherein the right of the corporate debtor to propose
an interim resolution professional is abrogated. In such cases, the Adjudicating
Authority shall make a reference to the Board for recommending an insolvency
professional who may act as an interim resolution professional and accordingly
appoint the interim resolution professional.
Clause 11 of the Bill seeks to amend clause (b) of section 18 of the Code to
clarify that the Board is empowered to specify the manner of collating the claims
received from the creditors. It also seeks to insert an explanation in clause (b) of
section 18 to clarify that while collating the claims, the interim resolution
professional is empowered and obligated to verify the claims and, if required,
determine the value of such verified claims. While collating claims, the interim
resolution professional has the duty to verify them. In case the verified claim is not
precise, the interim resolution professional shall determine the value of the verified
claim. The amendment seeks to clarify this function, which will be carried out by
the interim resolution professional, the resolution professional, or the liquidator, as
applicable, in maintaining or updating the list of claims. The regulations will specify
the circumstances in which this function should be performed and the manner in
which it should be carried out.
Clause 12 of the Bill seeks to amend section 19 of the Code to provide the
categories of persons required to extend assistance to and cooperate with the interim
resolution professional. These categories will include any person who is or has been
(i) personnel of the corporate debtor, (ii) its promoter, (iii) associated with the
management of the corporate debtor, or (iv) engaged in a contract for service with
the corporate debtor. Constructive cooperation from the aforementioned categories
will enable the interim resolution professional to manage the affairs of the corporate
debtor and perform his duties effectively, such as collecting information for
purposes such as the conduct of the corporate insolvency resolution process, filing
applications for the avoidance of transactions, etc. In case these persons fail to assist
41
or cooperate, an application may be submitted to the Adjudicating Authority to
direct them, and, if necessary to ensure compliance, any other related persons
connected to them, to comply with the instructions issued by the resolution
professional and to cooperate with him. It is also clarified that the provisions of
section 19 apply to the interim resolution professional as well as the resolution
professional.
Clause 13 of the Bill seeks to amend section 21 of the Code to enable the
committee of creditors constituted during the corporate insolvency resolution
process to supervise the conduct of the liquidation process by the liquidator. The
committee of creditors would be able to incorporate the learnings acquired during
the corporate insolvency resolution process regarding the status of the corporate
debtor into supervising the conduct of the liquidation process thereby directing the
liquidator in taking efficient commercial decisions to liquidate the assets. It also
seeks to empower the Board to specify any other class or classes of creditors who
may attend the meetings of the committee of creditors during the liquidation process
in addition to its participants during the corporate insolvency resolution process.
However, such specified creditors will not have a right to vote in the meetings.
Clause 14 of the Bill seeks to amend section 22 of the Code to provide deemed
continuation of the interim resolution professional as a resolution professional
where the committee of creditors resolves to appoint him as a resolution
professional. The decision regarding the appointment shall be communicated to the
interim resolution professional, the corporate debtor, and the Board. It will ensure
that where an interim resolution professional appointed by the Adjudicating
Authority is continued as a resolution professional, separate intervention by the
Adjudicating Authority is not required.
Clause 15 of the Bill seeks to amend section 25 of the Code to clarify that the
duty of the resolution professional to file an application for avoidance transaction
under Chapter III also extends to fraudulent or wrongful trading under Chapter VI
of Part II.
Clause 16 of the Bill seeks to substitute section 26 of the Code to clarify that
the proceedings in respect of avoidance transactions or fraudulent or wrongful
trading or under section 47 of the Code shall not affect the corporate insolvency
resolution process, and these proceedings will continue independently and are not
affected by the completion of the corporate insolvency resolution process. Similarly,
it is also provided that filing of these proceedings shall not affect the liquidation
process, and completion of the liquidation process shall not affect the continuation
of these proceedings. The amendments to section 54 provide how such proceedings
shall continue after the liquidation process is completed and the corporate debtor is
dissolved.
Clause 17 of the Bill seeks to insert a new section 28A in Chapter II of Part II
in the Code to enable a transfer of an asset of a guarantor (personal or corporate) of
the corporate debtor as part of the corporate insolvency resolution process of such
corporate debtor. To transfer such asset as part of the corporate insolvency
resolution process of the corporate debtor, the creditor must (i) have a security
interest over an asset of the guarantor of the corporate debtor; (ii) have taken
possession of the asset by enforcing its security interest under any law for the time
being which should enable the creditor to transfer the asset. Further, such a creditor
and the committee of creditors of the corporate debtor must agree to transfer the
asset under this provision. However, where the guarantor is undergoing insolvency
resolution, liquidation or bankruptcy under the Code, additional approval will be
required from the committee of creditors or creditors of the guarantor, as the case
may be. The regulations will specify the process for transferring the assets of the
guarantor as part of the corporate insolvency resolution, including conditions on the
types of assets that can be transferred, the eligibility of persons who can purchase
these assets, and the method for determining their value in the case of a cumulative
42
transfer. After the transfer of the asset of the guarantor as part of the corporate
insolvency resolution process, the value received for such an asset shall be adjusted
towards the debt of the guarantor as per the applicable law, subject to any costs,
charges and expenses. Thereafter, any surplus shall be paid to the guarantor as per
the applicable law, and if the guarantor is undergoing insolvency resolution or
bankruptcy process under the Code, it shall be included as part of such process.
Clause 18 of the Bill seeks to amend sub-section (2) of section 30 of the Code to
provide that under a resolution plan, the minimum threshold for payment to the financial
creditors who have not voted in favour of the resolution plan (‘dissenting financial
creditors’) shall be the amount that would have been paid to them–(i) in the event of
liquidation under section 53 or (ii) if the amount to be distributed under the resolution plan
was distributed as per the order of priority under section 53, whichever is lower.
Accordingly, if the amount payable to dissenting financial creditors under the first scenario
is lower than that under the second scenario, then the amount under the first scenario shall
serve as the minimum that must be paid to them for the resolution plan to be considered
valid. This ensures that the requirement to provide at least a minimum amount to the
dissenting financial creditors does not obstruct the approval of a feasible and viable
resolution plan. It also seeks to amend clause (d) of sub-section (2) of section 30 of the
Code to provide that each resolution plans shall provide for the constitution of a committee
to oversee the implementation and supervision of the plan once it has been approved by
the Adjudicating Authority. The regulations will provide details such as the composition
of the committee, the cases in which it should be constituted, and its functions.
Clause 19 of the Bill seeks to insert a new proviso in sub-section (1) of
section 31 of the Code to enable the Adjudicating Authority to first approve the
implementation of the resolution plan, and then, by a separate order, approve the manner
of distribution provided therein within a period of thirty days. This power shall only be
exercised by the Adjudicating Authority on an application made by the resolution
professional with the approval of the committee of creditors. The Board will specify the
form and manner, and any condition for making such an application. Before approving the
implementation of the resolution plan, the Adjudicating Authority shall confirm that the
resolution plan meets the mandatory requirements under section 30 other than the
requirements concerning the manner of distribution such as the minimum distribution
related requirements for certain creditors. When the resolution plan is approved without
the manner of distribution, it shall be binding on all stakeholders as provided under
section 31. In the meantime, the moratorium imposed under section 14 will continue to
apply against the creditors and other stakeholders as the process is still in progress, subject
to the implementation of the resolution plan. When the manner of distribution is
subsequently approved, it shall also be binding and the process shall stand completed.
Additionally, it seeks to insert a proviso in sub-section (2) to empower the
Adjudicating Authority to provide an opportunity to the committee of creditors to
rectify any defects in the resolution plan before rejecting it, where the defects are
procedural, non-material and can be rectified by the committee of creditors. It also
seeks to insert sub-section (2A) to provide that the Adjudicating Authority must give
its order regarding approval or rejection within thirty days. In addition to the above,
it seeks to amend the proviso to sub-section (4) of section 31 to provide that if a
resolution plan provides for a combination which requires prior approval of the
Competition Commission of India under the Competition Act, 2002, then such
approval shall be obtained by the resolution applicant before the resolution plan is
submitted to the Adjudicating Authority for approval.
It further seeks to insert sub-sections (5) and (6) to clarify and acknowledge
the concept of the clean-slate principle recognised by judicial pronouncements.
Once a resolution plan is approved, claims are settled according to the plan, and
unless otherwise specified, they are extinguished. Therefore, such a resolution
should be recognised by and binding on all parties, and past liabilities should not
serve as a basis for suspending or terminating any grant or right, or for any
proceedings against the resolved corporate debtor.
43
Sub-section (5) clarifies that where the Adjudicating Authority has approved
a resolution plan, the grant or right given by the Central Government, State
Government, local authority, sectoral regulator, or any other authority constituted
under any other law for the time being in force that is associated with such a
resolution plan shall not be suspended or terminated during the subsistence of the
remaining period of such grants or rights. The resolution plan will specify the grants
or rights of the corporate debtor that are meant to be continued. To seek this
protection, the corporate debtor must comply with the obligations associated with
such grants or rights for the remainder of the period. It will also apply when the
assets of the corporate debtor, along with any grants or rights associated with the
corporate debtor, are sold to a resolution applicant who complies with the
obligations linked to such grants or rights for the remaining period. However, the
obligations in respect of the debts arising prior to the date of approval of the
resolution plan, which were resolved during the corporate insolvency resolution
process, shall be governed as per sub-section (6) of section 31. The provider of such
grants and rights cannot take non-payment of such debt as a ground for suspension
or termination.
Furthermore, sub-section (6) to clarifies that after the approval of the
resolution plan under sub-section (1), all claims against the corporate debtor or its
assets not covered by the resolution plan will be deemed to have extinguished, and
no proceedings shall be continued or instituted against the corporate debtor or its
assets in connection with such claims. It is clarified that this provision does not
affect any claim or proceedings against a former promoter or management or
guarantor of the corporate debtor. It is also clarified that if a person with joint
liability or a joint and several liability with the corporate debtor settles a debt that
was owed to a creditor before the approval of the resolution plan, then the right of
such a person to be indemnified by the corporate debtor shall also be extinguished
after the approval of the resolution plan.
Clause 20 of the Bill seeks to amend section 33 of the Code to extend the
moratorium declared during the corporate insolvency resolution process to the
liquidation process to the extent it is provided under clauses (a) and (b) of sub-
section (1) read with sub-section (3) of section 14. It is provided that the suits or
other legal proceedings on behalf of the corporate debtor shall not be commenced
or continued without the leave of the Adjudicating Authority. This will ensure that
the moratorium during the corporate insolvency resolution process also extends to
the liquidation process. As a result, all pending and future legal proceedings against
the corporate debtor will be prohibited, preventing multiple actions that could
deplete resources and cause delays. It significantly reduces the financial and
administrative burden on the liquidator, who would otherwise need to pursue or
defend numerous claims across various forums. It is also clarified that the
Adjudicating Authority, when issuing an order to initiate the liquidation process,
shall also appoint the liquidator in accordance with section 34.
Further, it seeks to insert new sub-sections (1A) and (1B) to section 33 to
restore the corporate insolvency resolution process in exceptional cases, provided
that the committee of creditors makes such a request by an application. The
Adjudicating Authority can only restore the process if it is satisfied that the
following circumstances under sub-section (1) exist-first, no resolution plan has
been approved within the period stipulated under the Code, or second, the resolution
plan approved by the committee of creditors has been rejected under section 31.
After considering the application, the Adjudicating Authority will determine if the
application demonstrates that there is still some potential to resolve the insolvency
of the corporate debtor and may, by an order, restore the process. This ensures that
errors, which cause either the process not to be completed on time or the resolution
plan to be rejected, do not prevent a corporate debtor from successfully resolving
insolvency and avoid forcing it into liquidation. In the first scenario, the
Adjudicating Authority will restore the process and provide an appropriate duration
44
within which the process must be completed, not exceeding one hundred twenty
days. In the second scenario, it shall restore the process to the stage of invitation of
the resolution plan and specify a duration within which the restored process should
be completed, not exceeding one hundred twenty days. The regulation will specify
the procedures and conditions for completing the restored process to ensure
effective outcomes and prevent abuse. This option to restore the process shall be
available only once, irrespective of which of the two scenarios it is exercised under.
It also enables the committee of creditors to seek dissolution of the corporate
debtor at any time during the corporate insolvency resolution process, but before
confirmation of the resolution plan and after complying with such conditions as may
be specified by the Board. Such a request may be made where the corporate debtor
does not have any meaningful or recoverable assets and undergoing the entire
process will be cumbersome and costly. It further seeks to provide a thirty-day
period within which the Adjudicating Authority shall pass a liquidation order.
Additionally, when an application is made for a liquidation order due to the
contravention of an approved resolution plan, the Adjudicating Authority may, in
exceptional cases, reinstate the corporate insolvency resolution process instead, if it
is viable for maximising the value of the corporate debtor. While reinstating the
process, it may determine the stage from which the process will commence and pass
any other orders to facilitate the process. Similarly, in such cases where the
Adjudicating Authority decides to make a liquidation order, it can also pass any
other orders it deems fit for efficient conduct of the process.
Clause 21 of the Bill seeks to amend section 34 of the Code to provide that
the liquidator shall be appointed on the proposal of the committee of creditors, and
the resolution professional shall not automatically be appointed as a liquidator. It
can either propose the existing resolution professional or propose another
insolvency professional, subject to their written consent to be appointed as the
liquidator. Where the committee of creditors does not forward the name of the
proposed liquidator or the Board does not confirm the name of the proposed
liquidator, the Adjudicating Authority shall appoint the liquidator on reference from
the Board. The existing resolution professional shall be disqualified from being
appointed as a liquidator at the initiation or during the process where the resolution
plan submitted by it was rejected for failure to meet the requirements of
sub-section (2) of section 30. It also seeks to substitute sub-section (3) of section 34
of the Code to apply provisions similar to the amended section 19 to the liquidation
process and voluntary liquidation process.
Clause 22 of the Bill seeks to insert a new section 34A in Chapter III of
Part II of the Code to allow for the replacement of liquidator by the committee of
creditors during the liquidation process as per this provision.
Clause 23 of the Bill seeks to amend section 35 of the Code to harmonise
the powers and duties of the liquidator during the liquidation process with those
during the corporate insolvency resolution process. This would avoid repetition of
common activities and ensure faster completion of the liquidation process. The
claims collated during the corporate insolvency resolution process will be
maintained and updated during the liquidation process. The Board will specify the
procedure for maintaining and updating the claims, including the need to verify
the claims and determine their value, if necessary. However, a fresh process of
invitation of claims will not be conducted. Further, the liquidator will not be
obligated to make a fresh investigation to identify avoidable transaction or
fraudulent or wrongful trading. However, it will be empowered and obligated to
continue or institute proceedings regarding an avoidance transaction or fraudulent
or wrongful trading.
45
It also seeks to extend the role of the committee of creditors constituted during the
corporate insolvency resolution process to the liquidation process. The committee of
creditors will supervise the conduct of the liquidation process by the liquidator. During
the liquidation process, the committee of creditors will advise and guide the liquidator
on commercial matters. It will act to uphold the interests of all stakeholders entitled to
distribution under section 53 and perform an oversight function to ensure transparency
and accountability in the conduct of the liquidation. The Board will specify how the
committee will supervise the conduct of the liquidation process by the liquidator.
Additionally, the role of the committee of creditors is limited to the liquidation process
under section 35 and does not extend to voluntary liquidation. When this provision
applies to voluntary liquidation pursuant to sub-section (6) of section 59, the Board will
establish a separate procedure for consulting stakeholders.
Clause 24 of the Bill seeks to amend section 36 of the Code as a consequential
change pursuant to the insertion of the definitions of “avoidance transaction” and
“fraudulent or wrongful trading” to clarify that assets recovered from all types of
proceedings in respect of avoidance transactions, fraudulent or wrongful trading, or
under section 47 of the Code shall be part of the liquidation estate.
Clause 25 of the Bill seeks to omit sections 38, 39, 40, 41, and 42 of the Code
to prevent duplication of processes in the corporate insolvency resolution process
and liquidation process. However, as provided under amendments made to
section 35, the liquidator will have the power and duty to maintain an updated list
of claims of creditors against the corporate debtor, as per the procedure specified in
the regulations.
Clause 26 of the Bill seeks to amend sub-section (4) of section 43 of the Code to
make two modifications to the look-back period for determining preferential
transactions. Firstly, it changes the threshold for the look-back period from the
insolvency commencement date to the initiation date (the date of filing of the application
for initiation of the corporate insolvency resolution process). Secondly, it includes the
period between the initiation date and the insolvency commencement date in the look-
back period for such transactions. Currently, the threshold for the look-back period in
section 43 is the insolvency commencement date (date on which the application for
initiation of the corporate insolvency resolution process is admitted). Where the
admission of an application takes longer than fourteen days, the look-back period for
preferential transactions may not be able to capture a significant portion of transactions
that occurred before the filing of an application. This may also give corporate debtors a
perverse incentive to delay admission of the application for the commencement of the
insolvency resolution process to reduce the scope of an avoidable transaction. Therefore,
the threshold for the look-back period for preferential transactions has been adjusted to
more effectively capture a broader range of pre-filing transactions, particularly those
undertaken in anticipation of the commencement of the insolvency resolution process
to exclude assets from the process.
Clause 27 of the Bill seeks to amend the marginal heading of section 46, to
substitute the word “avoidable” for the word “undervalued”. Similar to amendments
to section 43, it seeks to amend the threshold for the look-back period for
undervalued transactions to more effectively capture a broader range of pre-filing
transactions, particularly those undertaken in anticipation of the commencement of
the insolvency resolution process to exclude assets from the process.
Clause 28 of the Bill seeks to substitute section 47 of the Code to enable
creditors (individually or jointly with other creditors) or a member or partner of the
corporate debtor, as the case may be, to apply to the Adjudicating Authority for the
avoidance of an avoidable transaction under sections 43, 45, or 50 of the Code or
fraudulent or wrongful trading under section 66 of the Code if the liquidator or
resolution professional has not reported such transaction or trading to the
Adjudicating Authority. The Adjudicating Authority is empowered to pass an order
for the avoidance of such transactions or fraudulent or wrongful trading as if such
46
an application had been filed by the liquidator or resolution professional in
accordance with the relevant provisions of the Code. Following the passing of such
an order, the Adjudicating Authority is also empowered to pass an order requiring
the Board to initiate disciplinary proceedings against the liquidator or the resolution
professional, if it is satisfied that the liquidator or the resolution professional did not
report the transaction or trading to the Adjudicating Authority even after having
sufficient information or opportunity to obtain information regarding the same.
Clause 29 of the Bill seeks to amend clause (a) of the proviso to section 49 of the
Code to also exclude the property acquired from a related party of the corporate debtor
from the exception under this proviso. It prevents the transactions wherein the asset of
the corporate debtor is transferred to its related party, and consequently, such an asset is
transferred from the related party to a third party, from being exempted as “transactions
defrauding creditors”. However, if the asset is further transferred from the third party to
another person, it can still be exempted if the other requirements are met. This ensures
that the transfer of the property through a related party does not gain protection under
clause (a) of the proviso to section 49, which should apply to transactions taken in good
faith between the sellers and buyers of the property that belonged to the corporate debtor.
Clause 30 of the Bill seeks to amend sub-section (1) of section 50 of the Code to
make changes to the look-back period for determining extortionate credit transactions.
Similar to amendments to section 43, it seeks to amend the threshold for the look-back
period for extortionate credit transactions to more effectively capture a broader range of
pre-filing transactions, particularly those undertaken in anticipation of the
commencement of the insolvency resolution process to exclude assets from the process.
Clause 31 of the Bill seeks to amend sub-section (2) of section 52 of the Code to
include a mandatory timeline of fourteen days from the liquidation commencement date
for a secured creditor to convey its decision of whether it intends to realise the security
interest outside the liquidation process. If they fail to do so, such security interest will
be considered to be relinquished to the liquidation estate. This is to ensure the prompt
completion of the liquidation process and prevent any delays in liquidating the corporate
debtor. It also seeks to insert a proviso in sub-section (2) to clarify that in the event that
more than one secured creditor has any security interest over an asset of the corporate
debtor, no secured creditor shall be entitled to realise its security interest unless the
realisation is agreed upon by the secured creditors representing not less than sixty-six
per cent. of the value of all claims that are secured by such security interests. In cases
where multiple secured creditors have claims secured by a security interest over a
specific asset of the corporate debtor, only those secured claims related to that asset are
considered. This is regardless of whether the value of the asset is enough to cover all
claims or the priority of the security interest. These claims are combined, and secured
creditors representing at least sixty per cent. in value of this total secured claim must
agree to realisation outside the liquidation process.
It further seeks to amend sub-section (8) of section 52 to clarify that the
contribution of the amount towards the insolvency resolution process costs, liquidation
costs and workmen’s dues under clause (a) and sub-clause (i) of clause (b) of sub-section
(1) of section 53 shall be deducted from the proceeds of any realisation by the secured
creditors, when the secured creditor decides to realise its security interest outside the
liquidation process. This will ensure that a secured creditor who chooses to realise its
security interest outside the liquidation process contributes towards the insolvency
resolution costs, liquidation costs, and workmen’s dues, as these would have been
distributed if the secured creditor had relinquished their security interest to the
liquidation estate. The Board will specify the period and conditions for transferring the
amount to the liquidator and securing the payment. It also ensures that workmen do not
receive any lesser amount than the portion of dues accorded priority under
sub-clause (i) of clause (b) of sub-section (1) of section 53 in the liquidation process if
the secured creditors choose to stand outside the collective liquidation process to realise
their security interests. The requirement of contribution by secured creditors in such a
case will ensure the protection of the interests of the workmen.
47
Clause 32 of the Bill seeks to insert an explanation in sub-clause (ii) of clause (b)
of sub-section (1) of section 53 of the Code to clarify that in cases where the value of
the security interest that the secured creditor has relinquished to the liquidation estate is
less than the total debt that the corporate debtor owes to that secured creditor, such
secured creditor will be considered a secured creditor to the extent of the value of such
security interest. The Board will specify the manner of determining the value of the
security interest. For the remaining value of such debt, it shall be considered an
unsecured creditor.
It further seeks to insert an explanation in sub-clause (i) of clause (e) of
sub-section (1) of section 53 to clarify that the dues of the Central and State
Governments, whether or not a security interest is created to secure such amounts, shall
not receive a higher order of priority under sub-section (1) of section 53. The Central
and State Government dues for the period of two years preceding the liquidation
commencement date shall be distributed as per the order of priority under sub-clause (i)
of clause (e) of sub-section (1) of section 53, whether or not a security interest is created
to secure such amount. Such dues shall not be distributed as per the higher order of
priority under sub-clause (ii) of clause (b) of sub-section (1) of section 53 along with the
secured creditors even though a security interest is created to secure these dues. Beyond
the period of two years preceding the liquidation commencement date, any remaining
dues of the Central and State Government will be distributed as per the lower order of
priority under clause (f) of sub-section (1) of section 53.
Additionally, the clause seeks to insert illustrations after sub-section (2) to clarify
the scope and application of sub-section (2) of section 53.
Clause 33 of the Bill seeks to substitute sub-section (1) of section 54 of the Code
to provide timelines for completing the liquidation process within a period of one
hundred and eighty days from the liquidation commencement date. This period can be
extended by the Adjudicating Authority, on an application by the liquidator, by such a
period as it deems fit, provided that such period does not exceed ninety days.
It further seeks to insert sub-sections (1A) and (1B) to enable the committee of
creditors to determine the manner of pursuing proceedings in respect of an avoidance
transaction or fraudulent or wrongful trading or under section 47 and any suit or other
legal proceedings against the corporate debtor concerning any proceeds to be distributed
under section 53 after the dissolution of the corporate debtor, respectively. It will be the
duty of the committee of creditors to make suitable arrangements to pursue such
proceedings and distribute the proceeds recovered from such proceedings as per the
procedure specified by the Board, before the liquidator or the resolution professional
applies to dissolve the corporate debtor to the Adjudicating Authority.
It also seeks to insert sub-section (2A) to empower the Adjudicating Authority to
pass an order of dissolution of the corporate debtor on receipt of the decision of the
committee of creditors to dissolve the corporate debtor under sub-section (2) of
section 33 of the Code without completing corporate insolvency resolution process or
undergoing liquidation process. It may be considered by the Adjudicating Authority
whether the corporate debtor has any meaningful or recoverable assets, or if the entire
process will be cumbersome and costly when passing the dissolution order.
It also seeks to insert sub-section (2B), to provide that the passing of the
dissolution order shall not affect the continuation of proceedings in respect of avoidance
transaction or fraudulent or wrongful trading or under section 47 and any suit or other
legal proceedings against the corporate debtor concerning any proceeds to be distributed
under section 53. Before passing the dissolution order, the Adjudicating Authority
should confirm whether such proceedings are pending and if the committee of creditors
has made appropriate arrangements for their continuation post-dissolution. Further, the
forums conducting these proceedings should acknowledge the arrangements made by
the committee of creditors under sub-sections (1A) and (1B) and the dissolution order
passed by the Adjudicating Authority confirming them and proceed with those
proceedings accordingly.
48
Further, it seeks to insert sub-section (4) to provide a period of thirty days for the
Adjudicating Authority to pass a dissolution order.
Clause 34 seeks to amend sub-section (2) of section 54A of the Code as a
consequential change pursuant to the insertion of Chapter IV-A titled “Creditor-Initiated
Insolvency Resolution Process”.
Clause 35 of the Bill seeks to substitute sub-section (3) of section 54C of the Code
to enable the Board to specify the information to be furnished by the corporate applicant
along with the application to initiate the pre-packaged insolvency resolution process to
ensure efficiency.
Clause 36 of the Bill seeks to substitute sub-section (5) of section 54F of the Code
to apply provisions similar to the amended section 19 to the pre-packaged insolvency
resolution process to ensure assistance and cooperation with the resolution professional.
Clause 37 of the Bill seeks to amend section 54L of the Code to apply certain
changes made to sections 31 and 33 to the pre-packaged insolvency resolution process
under Chapter III-A of Part II of the Code.
Clause 38 of the Bill seeks to amend section 54N of the Code to apply changes
made to section 33 dealing with the initiation of the liquidation process to the pre-
packaged insolvency resolution process.
Clause 39 of the Bill seeks to omit Chapter IV of Part II of the Code comprising
of sections 55 to 58, which deal with the fast track corporate insolvency resolution
process. Consequential amendments are made to the Code for the omission of the
provisions related to the fast track corporate insolvency resolution process.
Clause 40 of the Bill seeks to insert a new Chapter IV-A titled Creditor-Initiated
Insolvency Resolution Process comprising new sections 58A to 58K in Part II of the
Code, which provide for:—
(i) Section 58A seeks to provide the types of corporate debtors who shall be
eligible for the creditor-initiated insolvency resolution process. Sub-section (1)
empowers the Central Government to notify the types of corporate debtors in
respect of whom the creditor-initiated insolvency resolution process may be
initiated. Additionally, sub-section (2) stipulates specific types of corporate
debtors for whom, despite eligibility under sub-section (1), the creditor-initiated
insolvency resolution process shall not be initiated. For instance, the corporate
debtors for whom either an insolvency resolution or liquidation process has been
commenced and is still undergoing, are excluded from being an eligible corporate
debtors in respect of whom the creditor-initiated insolvency resolution process
may be initiated. Also, the corporate debtors for whom any insolvency resolution
process has taken place three years preceding the creditor-initiated insolvency
commencement date will not be eligible for this process. To determine this
eligibility, three years will be calculated from the date of the public announcement
from which the creditor-initiated insolvency resolution process commences.
(ii) Section 58B seeks to provide the procedure for initiating the
creditor-initiated insolvency resolution process. Sub-section (1) provides that a
financial creditor of the corporate debtor in respect of whom default is committed
may initiate the creditor-initiated insolvency resolution process, should belong to
the class of financial institutions notified by the Central Government. Only these
notified financial creditors shall have the right to initiate the process. Additionally,
since this is an insolvency process under Part II, the minimum default threshold
specified in section 4 of the Code must be satisfied. Also, the Central Government
may prescribe other conditions for initiation of the process, which will be required
to be complied with for initiating the process.
49
Sub-section (2) lists the mandatory requirements that must be complied with
by the financial creditor seeking to initiate the process under this Chapter. First, the
financial creditor must obtain approval to initiate the process from the financial
creditors belonging to the notified class of financial institutions representing not less
than fifty-one per cent. of the total value of the debt due to such financial creditors.
After that, the financial creditor shall inform the corporate debtor about its intent to
initiate the process and give it at least thirty days to make any representation. Within
this period, the corporate debtor can either repay the default amount or make a
representation to the financial creditor for not initiating the process. If the default
continues to exist, the financial creditor may consider the representation of the
corporate debtor and decide whether to proceed with initiating the process. Since the
default still exists, it will be up to the subjective satisfaction of the financial creditor
whether or not to initiate the process. Where the financial creditor decides to pursue
the initiation of the process, it shall again seek the approval of the financial creditors
belonging to such notified class of financial institutions, representing not less than
fifty-one per cent. in value of the debt due to such financial creditors, to initiate the
process. If the financial creditor fails to obtain approval within thirty days, it will
need to start the procedure again under sub-section (2) if it intends to initiate the
process. This ensures that the financial creditor does not delay the initiation of the
process and promptly considers the representation.
Sub-section (3) provides that if requirements under sub-section (2) are
fulfilled, the financial creditor may appoint an insolvency professional as the
resolution professional. No disciplinary proceedings should be pending
against such insolvency professional. The financial creditor (after considering
the representation of the corporate debtor) can appoint the resolution
professional immediately after obtaining the approval of the notified class of
financial institutions. If no representation is received, implying that the
corporate debtor has no objection to initiating the process, the financial
creditor may immediately appoint the resolution professional after the
completion of the period for making the representation.
Sub-section (4) provides that the resolution professional, after its
appointment, shall make a public announcement of the initiation of the process
and communicate the same to the Adjudicating Authority and the Board. The
resolution professional shall also submit a report based on its own evaluation,
along with such communication, confirming whether the requirements under
sections 58A and 58B are met. The Board shall specify the period within which
the public announcement should be made and its form and manner. The creditor-
initiated insolvency resolution process shall be deemed to have initiated from the
date of the public announcement, and no order or direction from the Adjudicating
Authority or the Board shall be required for the same. This will be an out-of-court
commencement of the process. If the public announcement is not made within the
specified period, the pre-commencement procedures would expire, and any later
public announcement shall not be considered valid. The Board shall specify
appropriate procedure to ensure that the resolution professionals adhere to the
period and procedures for commencing the process.
Sub-section (5) provides that after the process under Chapter IV-A is
commenced, no application for initiation of the corporate insolvency
resolution process or the pre-packaged insolvency resolution process in
respect of the corporate debtor shall be filed during the creditor-initiated
insolvency resolution process period. Since the corporate debtor will be
undergoing an insolvency resolution process, its creditors will be required to
participate in this process by submitting claims. Hence, no default of a
corporate debtor should be the basis for filing or admitting an application to
initiate another insolvency resolution process.
50
(iii) Section 58C seeks to allow the corporate debtor to object to the
commencement of the process under section 58B by applying to the Adjudicating
Authority within thirty days from the creditor-initiated insolvency
commencement date. The right to object to the commencement of the process
before the Adjudicating Authority, can be exercised only after the process has
been initiated and not before the public announcement under section 58B. If the
corporate debtor chooses not to object within the specified period, it will be
assumed that it has no objection and that the initiation of the process is valid.
Sub-section (2) of section 58C provides that where the Adjudicating
Authority is satisfied that a default has not occurred, or both a default has not
occurred and also the initiation of the process is in contravention of the
procedure stipulated under sections 58A or 58B, it may, by an order, declare
the commencement of the process as void ab-initio. The Adjudicating
Authority will only be required to ascertain whether these two requirements
are fulfilled, and no other ground or objection shall be considered. However,
if the Adjudicating Authority is satisfied that a default has occurred, but the
initiation of the process is in contravention of sections 58A or 58B, it shall
convert the creditor-initiated insolvency resolution to the corporate insolvency
resolution process and pass an order under sub-section (1) of section 58H.
When objections are raised solely due to non-compliance with the procedure
specified under sections 58A or 58B, and not based on the existence of the
default, the Adjudicating Authority shall assume that a default exists and
convert the process to the corporate insolvency resolution process if it is
satisfied that there is material non-compliance with such procedure.
(iv) Section 58D sets out the period for the completion of the creditor-
initiated insolvency resolution process. Sub-section (1) provides that the process
shall be completed within one hundred and fifty days. Sub-section (2) allows this
period to be extended by period of forty-five days. Any extension to this period
extension shall not be granted more than once. Sub-section (3) provides that where
the committee of creditors does not approve any resolution plan within the
stipulated period in sub-section (1) or under the extended period under sub-section
(2), the Adjudicating Authority shall pass an order under sub-section (1) of section
58H converting the creditor-initiated insolvency resolution process into corporate
insolvency resolution process. The Board will provide the procedure for the
resolution professional to inform the Adjudicating Authority, and accordingly, it
will convert this process into the corporate insolvency resolution process. Such a
mandatory period will ensure timely resolution of insolvency. It will also ensure
that protections (like moratorium) during the process with control of the corporate
debtor by its management do not continue beyond the period mentioned in this
section to avoid any misuse of the process.
(v) Section 58E sets out the duties and powers of the resolution
professional during the creditor-initiated insolvency resolution period. The
resolution professional shall exercise and perform these duties and powers
only after the commencement of the process by public announcement and not
before such commencement. He will be required to call for submission of
claims, prepare the information memorandum, perform the duties referred to
in clauses (a) to (c) of section 18 and clauses (e) to (j) of sub-section (2) of
section 25, exercise powers referred to in sub-section (3) and (4) of
section 54F, file such report and documents with the Board and perform such
other duties specified by the Board. The resolution professional is also
required prepare a report confirming whether the conduct of the process is in
accordance with the procedural requirements and that the resolution plan
complies with the requirements of sections 29A and 30. The provisions similar
to section 19 apply to the creditor-initiated insolvency resolution process to
ensure assistance and cooperation with the resolution professional.
51
(vi) Section 58F states that the management of the affairs of the corporate
debtor shall continue to vest in the Board of Directors or the partners of the
corporate debtor, as the case may be, during the creditor-initiated insolvency
resolution process period. The provisions of section 54H shall, mutatis mutandis
apply, to the proceedings under this Chapter. However, prior approval from the
committee of creditors shall be required for certain actions mentioned in section
28. Additionally, the resolution professional shall, from the creditor-initiated
insolvency commencement date, attend all meetings of the members, Board of
directors, and committee of directors, or partners of the corporate debtor. The
resolution professional can reject any decision or resolution made in these
meetings, and if rejected, such decision or resolution shall not be approved or
adopted. The regulations may provide for any condition in the exercise of this right
and the manner for the same. This will ensure that the management of the
corporate debtor is conducted in an orderly manner which aligns with the creditor-
initiated insolvency resolution process. Also, the promoter and personnel of the
corporate debtor are required to provide relevant information related to the
corporate debtor to the resolution professional for preparing the information
memorandum and shall be liable for any non-compliance.
(vii) Section 58G seeks to allow the resolution professional to make an
application before the Adjudicating Authority for a moratorium for the
purpose of sub-section (1) read with sub-section (3) of section 14 after
obtaining approval of the committee of creditors. This application may also be
filed before the constitution of the committee of creditors, after obtaining
approval of the financial creditors of the corporate debtor belonging to the
class of financial institutions notified under sub-section (1) of section 58B,
who represent not less than fifty-one per cent. in value of the debt due to such
financial creditors. Sub-section (2) states that the moratorium shall commence
from the date of application and shall continue to be in operation during the
creditor-initiated insolvency resolution process period. The Adjudicating
Authority may confirm the moratorium, if it is satisfied that the moratorium is
required for the proper and efficient conduct of the creditor-initiated
insolvency resolution process or reject the application.
While confirming, the Adjudicating Authority may consider factors such as
the necessity to protect and preserve the assets of the corporate debtor, the conduct
of the process in a fair and orderly manner, or the non-cooperation by the
management of the corporate debtor. Further, the scope of its jurisdiction is limited
to considering the need for the moratorium during the process, and it shall not be
required to determine the correctness of the initiation of the process or the extent
of the moratorium. Once the moratorium is imposed under this section, unless it
is rejected by the Adjudication Authority, it shall have effect until the creditor-
initiated insolvency resolution process period has concluded. Post confirmation,
the Adjudicating Authority is not empowered to consider a request to lift or
modify the moratorium. To inform the public about the imposition of the
moratorium, the resolution professional must make a public announcement when
an application for a moratorium is filed and, after that, if the application is rejected.
This will ensure that all stakeholders of the corporate debtor, especially its
creditors, have information about the imposition of a moratorium.
(viii) Section 58H provides that the Adjudicating Authority shall
convert the creditor-initiated insolvency resolution process to the corporate
insolvency resolution process in the following cases: (a) where it does not
receive a resolution plan for approval within the stipulated period under
section 58D; (b) where it is satisfied that the corporate debtor or its personnel
have failed to assist or cooperate with the resolution professional; or (c)
where it rejected the resolution plan. Clearly outlining the events for the
conversion of the process ensures that it proceeds promptly and prevents the
management of the corporate debtor from abusing its protections. While
52
passing an order for conversion, the Adjudicating Authority shall also decide the
stage from which the corporate insolvency resolution process shall commence. It
may consider any recommendations made by the committee of creditors in this
regard and decide on the appropriate stage for commencing the process. Also, it
shall accordingly appoint the resolution professional for the creditor-initiated
insolvency resolution process as the interim resolution professional or the
resolution professional for the corporate insolvency resolution process, declare a
moratorium for the purposes referred to in section 14, and declare that the costs
incurred during the creditor-initiated insolvency resolution process shall be
included as part of the insolvency resolution process costs.
Additionally, sub-section (2) provides that the committee of creditors
may, at any time during the creditor-initiated insolvency resolution process, decide
to convert the creditor-initiated insolvency resolution process to the corporate
insolvency resolution process, and the resolution professional shall make an
application to the Adjudicating Authority. On receipt of such application, the
Adjudicating Authority shall pass an order for conversion of the process to the
corporate insolvency resolution process. Sub-section (3) clarifies that where any
order of conversion is passed under this section, it shall be deemed to be an order
under section 7 of the Code, the proceedings initiated for avoidance transaction or
fraudulent or wrongful trading or under section 47 shall continue. The creditor-
initiated insolvency resolution process period shall be included in the relevant period
for determining avoidance transactions. Additionally, when passing the conversion
order, the Adjudicating Authority shall decide the stage at which the corporate
insolvency resolution process shall commence, based on the procedures that have
taken place during the creditor-initiated insolvency resolution process and their
appropriateness. When making this decision, it may take into account any
recommendations from the committee of creditors, if they choose to provide them.
(ix) Section 58-I lays down the procedure for withdrawal of the public
announcement made under section 58B and closing the creditor-initiated
insolvency resolution process. Sub-section (1) provides that the Adjudicating
Authority may allow withdrawal of the public announcement on an application
made by the resolution professional with the approval of ninety per cent. of the
voting share of the committee of creditors. Sub-section (2) provides that the public
announcement shall not be withdrawn before the constitution of the committee of
creditors and after the first invitation for submission of a resolution plan issued by
the resolution professional. Sub-section (3) provides that the Adjudicating
Authority shall pass an order under sub-section (1) within a period of fourteen
days from the date of receipt of the application.
(x) Section 58J provides for the procedure for approval of the resolution plan
by the Adjudicating Authority. Sub-section (1) provides that where the committee
of creditors approves a resolution plan by a vote of not less than sixty-six percent
of the voting share, the resolution professional shall submit such approved
resolution plan to the Adjudicating Authority, along with the report referred to in
clause (c) of sub-section (1) of section 58E confirming whether the conduct of the
process is in accordance with the procedural requirements and that the resolution
plan, filed along with it, complies with the requirements of sections 29A and 30.
The report shall be given due regard by the Adjudicating Authority when
approving the resolution plan to ensure prompt adjudication. Sub-section (2)
provides that the Adjudicating Authority shall pass an order in accordance with
section 31, which shall, mutatis mutandis, apply to the creditor-initiated
insolvency resolution process, and the resolution plan approved during this
process have the same effect as approved during the corporate insolvency
resolution process. While considering the request for approval of the resolution
plan, the Adjudicating Authority shall have limited jurisdiction to ensure
procedural compliance, similar to its jurisdiction under section 31 during the
corporate insolvency resolution process.
53
(xi) Section 58K provides that certain provisions of Part II of the Code that
shall, mutatis mutandis apply, to the creditor-initiated insolvency resolution
process with suitable modifications. Further, the Board is empowered to specify
the conditions and procedural requirements for establishing a detailed process for
creditor-initiate insolvency resolution process to ensure efficient outcomes.
Clause 41 of the Bill seeks to amend section 59 of the Code to provide for a period
to be specified by the Board within which the voluntary liquidation is to be completed,
which shall not be more than one year. It also provides that the report of the valuation
of the assets of the company, as required under sub-section (3) of section 59, will be
prepared by a valuer registered under section 247 of the Companies Act, 2013. Further,
it provides the procedure for termination of the voluntary liquidation in certain
circumstances. There may be scenarios where such termination may be warranted. For
instance, business opportunities may emerge that can make the corporate person
profitable or viable after initiating the voluntary liquidation process. To account for this,
the amendment has provided a streamlined manner of making such terminations similar
to commencement procedure of the voluntary liquidation process.
It also seeks to amend sub-section (6) of section 59 due to the omission of
sections 38 to 42 of the Code, dealing with the consolidation, verification, admission or
rejection and determination of claims. A reference to clause (b) of section 18 is inserted,
which will apply to the voluntary liquidation process with such modifications as
necessary. It clarifies that the omission of sections 38 to 42 under Chapter III of Part II
of the Code does not affect the powers and duties of the liquidator to verify the claims
and determine their value. The regulations may also provide a detailed process for
claims invitation and consideration.
Clause 42 of the Bill seeks to insert a new Chapter VA titled “Group Insolvency”
in Part II of the Code to enable the Central Government to make rules concerning the
manner and conditions for conducting insolvency proceedings and liquidation
proceedings under Part II, where these proceedings are initiated against two or more
corporate debtors that form part of a group. The group insolvency framework will
facilitate improved coordination between insolvency resolution and liquidation
processes for corporate debtors that form part of a group to maximise the value. In
addition to these general powers, an indicative list of subject matters on which the
Central Government may make rules to guide the implementation of this framework is
provided. It aims to establish a voluntary procedural coordination framework for group
insolvency. This will, among other things, seek the appointment of a group coordinator
to facilitate communication, information sharing, and alignment of proceedings. The
coordination will be through an agreement among the participating corporate debtors
and their committees of creditors. Additionally, a common bench may also be
constituted for further procedural coordination.
Also, there may be situations where implementation of this framework will
require alterations to the existing provisions of the Code, and the Central Government
is suitably empowered to make those modifications. Further, before the rules framed
under this section are issued, a draft of every rule proposed to be issued shall be laid
down before each House of Parliament as per the procedure provided in this Chapter.
Clause 43 of the Bill seeks to insert a new section 64A in Chapter VI of Part II of
the Code to introduce a penalty for initiating frivolous or vexatious proceedings before
the Adjudicating Authority under Part II of the Code to deter persons from initiating
such proceedings and delay the insolvency resolution and liquidation processes.
Clause 44 of the Bill seeks to amend section 65 of the Code due to the insertion
of Chapter IV-A titled “Creditor-Initiated Insolvency Resolution Process”. The penalty
under this section shall also apply to a person who initiates the creditor-initiated
insolvency resolution process fraudulently or with the intent of malice or to defraud any
person.
54
Clause 45 of the Bill seeks to amend section 66 of the Code relating to
fraudulent or wrongful trading to clarify that the liquidator is also permitted to file
applications under this section during the liquidation process.
Clause 46 of the Bill seeks to amend section 67A of the Code due to the
insertion of Chapter IV-A under Part II titled “Creditor-Initiated Insolvency
Resolution Process”. The penalty under this section shall also apply to the officers
of the corporate debtor during the creditor-initiated insolvency resolution process.
Clause 47 of the Bill seeks to insert a new sub-section (4) to section 96 of the
Code to provide that provisions of section 96 of the Code will not apply where an
application to initiate an insolvency resolution process in respect of a personal
guarantor to a corporate debtor is filed by a creditor or the debtor itself.
Clause 48 of the Bill seeks to amend sub-section (1) of section 99 of the Code
to extend the period to twenty-one days within which the resolution professional
shall examine the application filed under section 94 or section 95 and to submit its
report to the Adjudicating Authority. Further, it seeks to amend sub-section (10) of
section 99 to require the resolution professional to provide a copy of its report to
both the debtor and the creditor, who are parties to the proceeding. This amendment
will ensure fairness in the process as both the debtor and creditor in a proceeding
will be informed of the findings of the report, and it will assist them in presenting
their submissions before the Adjudicating Authority.
Clause 49 of the Bill seeks to insert a new sub-section (1A) into section 106 of the
Code to provide that where no repayment plan is submitted within twenty-one days from
the last date of claim submission as required under section 105 of the Code, the
resolution professional must submit a report to the Adjudicating Authority. The
Adjudicating Authority will then terminate the process if it is satisfied that the debtor
failed to prepare the repayment plan in consultation with the resolution professional
within the stipulated period. No extension will be granted, and after the termination of
the process, the debtor or creditor will be entitled to apply for bankruptcy of the debtor.
It further seeks to insert a new sub-section (3A) into section 106 to provide
that where the repayment plan is being submitted during the insolvency resolution
process of a debtor who is a personal guarantor to a corporate debtor, it is mandatory
for the resolution professional to summon a meeting of the creditors for
consideration of the repayment plan by issuing a notice.
Clause 50 of the Bill seeks to amend section 121 of the Code to clarify that once
the Adjudicating Authority issues an order terminating the insolvency resolution process
of the debtor due to the non-preparation of the repayment plan in accordance with
sub-section (1A) of section 106, a creditor individually or jointly with other creditors or
a debtor, may make an application for bankruptcy of the debtor.
Clause 51 of the Bill seeks to insert a new sub-section (4) to section 124 of
the Code to provide that provisions of section 124 of the Code will not apply where
an application to initiate a bankruptcy process in respect of a personal guarantor to
a corporate debtor is filed by a creditor or the debtor itself.
Clause 52 of the Bill seeks to insert a new section 164A in the Code for the
insolvency resolution and bankruptcy of individuals and partnership firms under
Part III of the Code concerning transactions defrauding creditors similar to
section 49 under Part II of the Code.
Clause 53 of the Bill seeks to insert an explanation into clause (d) of
sub-section (1) of section 178 of the Code to clarify that the Central and State
Government dues for the period of two years preceding the bankruptcy
commencement date shall be distributed as per the order of priority under clause (d)
of sub-section (1) of section 178, whether or not a security interest is created to
secure such amount. Such dues shall not be distributed as per the higher order of
priority under sub-clause (ii) of clause (b) of sub-section (1) of section 178. Beyond
55
the period of two years preceding the bankruptcy commencement date, any
remaining dues of the Central and State Government will be distributed as per the
lower order of priority under clause (e) of sub-section (1) of section 178.
Clause 54 of the Bill seeks to insert a new section 183A in Chapter VI of
Part II of the Code to introduce a penalty for initiating frivolous or vexatious proceedings
before the Adjudicating Authority under Part III of the Code to deter persons from
initiating such proceedings and delay the insolvency and bankruptcy processes.
Clause 55 of the Bill seeks to amend sub-section (1) of section 196 of the Code
to substitute the references to insolvency professional agencies, insolvency
professionals, and information utilities, wherever they occur in various clauses of
this provision, with ‘service providers’, as a common definition of ‘service provider’
is inserted into section 3 of the Code. The Board may provide registration and other
norms for all persons falling under the definition of service providers.
It further seeks to insert an explanation into clause (c) of sub-section (1) of
section 196 to clarify that the Board can also levy fees or other charges in relation
to all types of insolvency resolution, liquidation, and bankruptcy processes covered
under the Code.
It also seeks to insert clause (sa) into sub-section (1) of section 196 to
empower the Board to specify regulations for the standards of conduct of the
committee of creditors and its members while acting under Part II and Part III of the
Code. This will help the committee of creditors and its members to operate
efficiently and effectively.
It also seeks to amend clause (t) of sub-section (1) of section 196 to empower
the Board to make regulations and guidelines relating to insolvency and bankruptcy
as may be required for carrying out the purposes of the Code.
Clause 56 of the Bill seeks to insert clause (cb) into sub-section (1) of
section 208 of the Code consequent to the insertion of the creditor-initiated
insolvency resolution process under Chapter IV-A of Part II.
Clause 57 of the Bill seeks to amend clause (e) of section 214 of the Code to
empower the Board to specify the procedure for the authentication of information
received by the information utilities. The regulation will specify a suitable procedure
and timeline for the corporate debtor or debtor to authenticate the information.
Clause 58 of the Bill seeks to amend section 215 of the Code by substituting
the previous marginal heading “Procedure for submission, etc. of financial
information.” with a new marginal heading, “Submission and authentication of
financial information to information utilities”.
It further seeks to amend sub-section (3) of section 215 so as to require the
operational creditors to submit financial information to an information utility under
this provision before filing an application under section 9 of the Code. The Board
will ensure that the information utility lays down appropriate and convenient
procedures for different types of operational creditors to submit information under
this provision.
It also seeks to insert a new sub-section (4) of section 215 to provide that the
corporate debtor or debtor, regarding whom information is submitted under
section 215, will be required to authenticate such information. The corporate debtor
or the debtor can either agree with the information submitted, add to the same, or
dispute the submitted information (also provide supporting documents). The
information submitted by the creditors and the corporate debtors or debtors will be
stored with the information utility, which can be relied upon by the Adjudicating
Authority for different processes under the Code. If the corporate debtor or debtor
does not to respond to such stored information, then the submitted information shall
be deemed to be authenticated and it will be restricted from disputing the
information later.
56
Clause 59 of the Bill seeks to amend sections 217 of the Code to substitute the
words “insolvency professional agency or insolvency professional or information
utility”, wherever they occur in the section, with the term “service provider”, as a
common definition of “service provider” is inserted into section 3 of the Code.
Therefore, these provisions will apply to all types of persons covered under the
definition of “service provider”.
Clause 60 of the Bill seeks to amend section 218 of the Code to substitute the
words “insolvency professional agency or insolvency professional or information
utility”, wherever they occur in the section, with the term “service provider”, as a
common definition of “service provider” is inserted into section 3 of the Code.
Therefore, these provisions will apply to all types of persons covered under the
definition of “service provider”.
Clause 61 of the Bill seeks to substitute Section 219 of the Code to clarify that
the Board may issue a show cause notice to a service provider if it is of prima facie
opinion that sufficient cause exists to take action under section 220 of the Code.
Such action can be taken based on the findings of the inspection or investigation
upon their completion under section 218 of the Code or on the basis of any material
on record.
Clause 62 of the Bill seeks to substitute sub-section (1) of section 220 of the
Code to clarify that the Board shall constitute one or more than one disciplinary
committees consisting of one or more persons from amongst its Chairperson, whole-
time members or officers not below the rank of the Executive Director. Considering
the increasing number of service providers rendering services in the insolvency and
bankruptcy ecosystem, it is provided that officers not below the rank of the
Executive Director may be part of the disciplinary committee. It also seeks to insert
a new sub-section (1A) into section 220 of the Code to clarify that the show-cause
notice to a service provider be referred to one of the standing disciplinary
committees.
It further seeks to substitute sub-section (2) of section 220 to clarify that the
disciplinary committee can take one or more actions against the service provider by
an order, after giving it an opportunity to be heard, if it is satisfied that sufficient
cause exists for taking these actions based on the material on record. These actions
may include imposing penalties or suspending or cancelling registration or directing
disgorgement, as the case may be. It also seeks to amend sub-section (3) of
section 220 to clarify that the quantum mentioned under this provision is an upper
limit for the imposition of the penalty within which the disciplinary committee may
decide the proportionate penalty amount for a contravention. Additionally, the upper
limit for imposing penalties is increased from one crore rupees to two crore rupees.
Furthermore, it seeks to amend sub-sections (4) and (5) of section 220 to
empower the disciplinary committee to issue a direction for disgorgement. The
disciplinary committee, while undertaking an action under sub-section (3) of
section 220, may also determine whether to direct disgorgement of an amount
equivalent to such unlawful gain or aversion of loss, after giving the service provider
an opportunity to be heard. After a direction for disgorgement is issued by the order
under sub-section (2), the disciplinary committee shall also take action to provide
restitution of the disgorged amount in accordance with the procedure specified by
the Board.
Moreover, it seeks to insert new sub-sections (7) and (8) into section 220 to
enable a person to prefer an appeal to the National Company Law Appellate
Tribunal against the orders of the disciplinary committee.
57
Clause 63 of the Bill seeks to amend section 224 of the Code, which provides
for the formation of the Insolvency and Bankruptcy Fund (‘Fund’) for insolvency
resolution, liquidation, and bankruptcy of persons under the Code. It seeks to insert
a new clause (e) into sub-section (2) of section 224, permitting the contribution of
amounts from other sources to the Fund as may be prescribed by the Central
Government through rules. It also seeks to substitute sub-section (3) of section 224
to enable the Central Government to prescribe a detailed framework for utilising the
Fund. This clarifies that in addition to the funds utilised by the persons who have
contributed to it, the Central Government can also prescribe other purposes for
which the funds can be utilised.
Clause 64 of the Bill seeks to substitute section 235A of the Code with a new
provision to allow the Adjudicating Authority, on an application made by the Board
or the Central Government or any person authorised by the Central Government, to
impose a penalty on any person who has contravened any provision of the Code, or
any rules or regulations made thereunder. It provides the lower and upper monetary
thresholds within which the Adjudicating Authority is empowered to impose a
proportional penalties for these contraventions.
Clause 65 of the Bill seeks to amend sub-section (1) of section 239 of the Code
to enable the Central Government to frame rules for carrying out the purposes of the
Code rather than for carrying out the provisions of the Code. It also seeks to amend
sub-section (2) of section 239 to enable the Central Government to frame rules for
matters related to amendments made to the provisions of the Code.
Clause 66 of the Bill seeks to amend sub-section (1) of section 240 of the Code
to enable the Board to frame regulations for carrying out the purposes of the Code
rather than for carrying out the provisions of the Code. It also seeks to amend
sub-section (2) of section 240 to enable the Board to frame regulations for matters
related to amendments made to the provisions of the Code.
Clause 67 of the Bill seeks to insert new sections 240B and 240C in Part V of
the Code, which provide for:
Section 240B empowers the Central Government to provide, by way of
notification, an electronic portal and the procedures related to the insolvency and
bankruptcy processes under the Code, which shall be carried out on such electronic
portal.
Section 240C of the Code empowers the Central Government to prescribe
rules relating to cross-border insolvency proceedings, for administering and
conducting cross-border insolvency proceedings under the Code, for such class or
classes of debtors and corporate debtors as may be notified by the Central
Government. It also provides that the rules made under this section may provide that
any of the provisions of the Code or the Companies Act, 2013 shall apply with such
exceptions, modifications, and adaptations, as may be required to administer, and
implement the provisions of this section and rules made thereunder, including
designating one or more Benches for dealing with proceedings under this section.
Further, before the rules framed under this section are issued, a draft of every rule
proposed to be issued shall be laid down before each House of Parliament as per the
procedure provided in this provision.
Clause 68 of the Bill seeks to insert a new sub-section (1A) into section 242
of the Code to empower the Central Government to remove any difficulty that may
arise in giving effect to the provisions of the Insolvency and Bankruptcy Code
(Amendment) Act, 2025, by publishing an order in the Official Gazette, before the
expiry of five years from the date of commencement of this Act. Every such order
made by the Central Government shall be laid before each House of Parliament as
soon as possible under sub-section (2) of section 242.
58
FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM
The provisions of the Insolvency and Bankruptcy Code (Amendment) Bill,
2025, if enacted, does not involve any expenditure of recurring or non-recurring,
from and out of the Consolidated Fund of India.
58
59
MEMORANDUM REGARDING OF DELEGATED LEGISLATION
Clause 65 of the Bill empowers the Central Government to make rules to carry
out the purposes of the Code. It also empowers the Central Government to make
rules in respect of the following matters, namely:—
(a) the conditions under sub-section (1) of section 58B;
(b) the fee for filing an objection under sub-section (1) of section 58C;
(c) the manner and conditions under sub-section (1) of section 59A;
(d) the other sources of amounts to be credited to the Insolvency and
Bankruptcy Fund under clause (e) of sub-section (2) of section 224;
(e) the purposes under clause (a) of sub-section (3) of section 224;
(f) the other purposes and the manner under clause (b) of sub-section (3)
of section 224; and
(g) the manner and conditions under sub-section (1) of section 240C.
2. Clause 66 of the Bill confers power upon the Insolvency and Bankruptcy
Board of India (Board) to make regulations to carry out the purposes of the Code. It
also empowers the Board to make regulations in respect of the following matters,
namely:—
(a) other information under clause (e) of sub-section (3) of section 9;
(b) the other document or any other information under clause (a) of
sub-section (3) of section 10;
(c) the manner under sub-section (1) of section 12A;
(d) the manner under clause (b) of section 18;
(e) any other class or classes of creditors who may attend the meetings
of committee of creditors under the proviso to sub-section (11) of section 21;
(f) the manner and conditions under sub-section (1) of section 28A;
(g) the manner of payment of debts of financial creditors who do not
vote in favour of the resolution plan under clause (ba), the conditions and
manner for constitution of a committee under clause (d) and the other
requirements to which a resolution plan shall conform to under clause (f) of
sub-section (2) of section 30;
(h) the form, manner and the conditions under the second proviso to
sub-section (1) of section 31;
(i) the manner and conditions for making an application by the
committee of creditors for restoring the corporate insolvency resolution
process and manner and conditions for completing the restored corporate
insolvency resolution process under sub-section (1A) of section 33;
(j) the conditions under the proviso to sub-section (2) of section 33;
(k) the period within which and the manner in which the committee of
creditors shall forward the name of the proposed resolution professional or the
proposed insolvency professional to be appointed as the liquidator to the
Adjudicating Authority, the form of written consent from the resolution
professional under clause (a) and the form of written consent from the
insolvency professional under clause (b) of sub-section (1) of section 34;
(l) the form of written consent from insolvency professional under
sub-section (6) of section 34;
59
60
(m) the fee for the conduct of the liquidation proceedings and proportion
to the value of the liquidation estate assets under sub-section (8) of section 34;
(n) the form for giving written consent under sub-section (1) of section 34A;
(o) the manner of maintaining an updated list of claims of creditors under
clause (a) of sub-section (1) of section 35;
(p) the manner in which the committee of creditors shall supervise the
conduct of the liquidation process by the liquidator under sub-section (2) of
section 35;
(q) the manner, period and conditions under sub-section (8) of section 52;”;
(r) the period and the manner of distribution of proceeds of sale under
sub-section (1) of section 53;
(s) the manner of determining the value of security interest under the
Explanation to sub-clause (ii) of clause (b) of sub-section (1) of section 53;
(t) the manner in which the liquidator shall make an application to the
Adjudicating Authority for the dissolution of the corporate debtor under
sub-section (1) of section 54;
(u) the manner and conditions under sub-section (1A) of section 54;
(v) the manner and conditions under sub-section (1B) of section 54;
(w) the manner under the proviso to sub-section (2A) of section 54;
(x) the information to be furnished under sub-section (3) of section 54C;
(y) the manner under clause (a), the form and manner under clause (b),
and the manner under clause (c) of sub-section (2) of section 58B;
(z) the period, form and manner under sub-section (4) of section 58B;
(za) the form and manner under sub-section (1) of section 58C;
(zb) the manner and conditions for exercising the powers and performing
duties by the resolution professional under section 58E;
(zc) the form in which the report to be prepared under clause (c), the
report and documents to be filed with the Board under clause (f), and such
other duties to be performed under clause (g) of section 58E;
(zd) the conditions and manner for the resolution professional to attend
the meetings and exercise the right to reject under sub-section (2) and the form,
manner and period under sub-section (3) of section 58F;
(ze) the manner under the proviso to sub-section (1) of section 58G;
(zf) the form and manner in which the resolution professional shall make
public announcement under sub-section (3) of section 58G;
(zg) the manner under sub-clause (ii) of sub-section (1) of section 58H;
(zh) the form and manner under sub-section (2) of section 58H;
(zi) the manner under sub-section (1) of section 58-I;
(zj) the conditions and procedural requirements under sub-section (2) of
section 58K;”;
(zk) the period under sub-section (2) of section 59
(zl) the other conditions under clause (c) of sub-section (5A) of section 59;
(zm) the other consequences under sub-section (5C) of section 59;”;
61
(zn) standards of conduct of the committee of creditors and its members
under clause (sa) sub-section (1) of section 196;
(zo) the manner under clause (e) of section 214;
(zp)the manner and period under sub-section (4) of section 215; and
(zq) the manner and period under section 219.
3. The matters in respect of which the rules and regulations may be made are
matters of procedure and administrative detail, and as such, it is not practical to
provide for them in the proposed Bill itself. The delegation of legislative power is,
therefore, of a normal character.
ANNEXURE
EXTRACTS FROM THE INSOLVENCY AND BANKRUPTCY CODE, 2016
(31 OF 2016)
* * * * *
Definitions. 3. * * * * *
(31) “security interest” means right, title or interest or a claim to
property, created in favour of, or provided for a secured creditor by a
transaction which secures payment or performance of an obligation and
includes mortgage, charge, hypothecation, assignment and encumbrance or
any other agreement or arrangement securing payment or performance of any
obligation of any person:
Provided that security interest shall not include a performance guarantee;
* * * * *
Definitions. 5. * * * * *
(2A) “base resolution plan” means a resolution plan provided by the
corporate debtor under clause (c) of sub-section (4) of section 54A;
* * * * *
(11) “initiation date” means the date on which a financial creditor, corporate
applicant or operational creditor, as the case may be, makes an application to the
Adjudicating Authority for initiating corporate insolvency resolution process or
pre-packaged insolvency resolution process, as the case may be;
* * * * *
(26) “resolution plan” means a plan proposed by resolution applicant for
insolvency resolution of the corporate debtor as a going concern in accordance
with Part II;
Explanation.—For the removal of doubts, it is hereby clarified that a
resolution plan may include provisions for the restructuring of the corporate
debtor, including by way of merger, amalgamation and demerger;
* * * * *
(28) “voting share” means the share of the voting rights of a single
financial creditor in the committee of creditors which is based on the
proportion of the financial debt owed to such financial creditor in relation to
the financial debt owed by the corporate debtor.
* * * * *
Initiation of 7. (1) * * * * *
corporate
insolvency (4) The Adjudicating Authority shall, within fourteen days of the receipt of
resolution the application under sub-section (2), ascertain the existence of a default from the
process by
records of an information utility or on the basis of other evidence furnished by the
financial
creditor. financial creditor under sub-section (3):
Provided that if the Adjudicating Authority has not ascertained the existence
of default and passed an order under sub-section (5) within such time, it shall record
its reasons in writing for the same.
(5) Where the Adjudicating Authority is satisfied that—
(a) a default has occurred and the application under sub-section (2) is
complete, and there is no disciplinary proceedings pending against the
proposed resolution professional, it may, by order, admit such application; or
62
63
(b) default has not occurred or the application under sub-section (2) is
incomplete or any disciplinary proceeding is pending against the proposed
resolution professional, it may, by order, reject such application:
Provided that the Adjudicating Authority shall, before rejecting the
application under clause (b) of sub-section (5), give a notice to the applicant to
rectify the defect in his application within seven days of receipt of such notice from
the Adjudicating Authority.
* * * * *
Application for
9. (1) * * * * *
initiation of
corporate
(3) The operational creditor shall, along with the application furnish—
insolvency
* * * * * resolution
process by
(e) any other proof confirming that there is no payment of an unpaid operational
creditor.
operational debt by the corporate debtor or such other information, as may be
prescribed;
* * * * *
(5) The Adjudicating Authority shall, within fourteen days of the receipt of
the application under sub-section (2), by an order—
(i) admit the application and communicate such decision to the
operational creditor and the corporate debtor if,—
(a) the application made under sub-section (2) is complete;
(b) there is no payment of the unpaid operational debt;
(c) the invoice or notice for payment to the corporate debtor has
been delivered by the operational creditor;
(d) no notice of dispute has been received by the operational
creditor or there is no record of dispute in the information utility; and
(e) there is no disciplinary proceeding pending against any
resolution professional proposed under sub-section (4), if any;
(ii) reject the application and communicate such decision to the
operational creditor and the corporate debtor, if—
(a) the application made under sub-section (2) is incomplete;
(b) there has been payment of the unpaid operational debt;
(c) the creditor has not delivered the invoice or notice for payment
to the corporate debtor;
(d) notice of dispute has been received by the operational creditor
or there is a record of dispute in the information utility; or
(e) any disciplinary proceeding is pending against any proposed
resolution professional:
Provided that Adjudicating Authority, shall before rejecting an
application under sub-clause (a) of clause (ii) give a notice to the
applicant to rectify the defect in his application within seven days of the
date of receipt of such notice from the Adjudicating Authority.
* * * * *
Initiation of
10. (1) * * * * *
corporate
insolvency
(3) The corporate applicant shall, along with the application, furnish—
resolution
(a) the information relating to its books of account and such other process by
corporate
documents for such period as may be specified;
applicant.
64
(b) the information relating to the resolution professional proposed to be
appointed as an interim resolution professional; and
* * * * *
(4) The Adjudicating Authority shall, within a period of fourteen days of the
receipt of the application, by an order—
(a) admit the application, if it is complete and no disciplinary proceeding
is pending against the proposed resolution professional; or
(b) reject the application, if it is incomplete or any disciplinary
proceeding is pending against the proposed resolution professional:
Provided that Adjudicating Authority shall, before rejecting an application,
give a notice to the applicant to rectify the defects in his application within seven
days from the date of receipt of such notice from the Adjudicating Authority.
* * * * *
Persons not 11. The following persons shall not be entitled to make an application to
entitled to make
initiate corporate insolvency resolution process under this Chapter, namely:—
application.
(ba) a corporate debtor in respect of whom a resolution plan has been
approved under Chapter III-A, twelve months preceding the date of making of
the application; or
* * * * *
Withdrawal of 12A. The Adjudicating Authority may allow the withdrawal of application
application admitted under section 7 or section 9 or section 10, on an application made by the
admitted under
applicant with the approval of ninety per cent. voting share of the committee of
section 7, 9 or
10. creditors, in such manner as may be specified.
* * * * *
Moratorium. 14. (1) Subject to provisions of sub-sections (2) and (3), on the insolvency
commencement date, the Adjudicating Authority shall by order declare moratorium
for prohibiting all of the following, namely:—
* * * * *
(3) The provisions of sub-section (1) shall not apply to—
* * * * *
(b) a surety in a contract of guarantee to a corporate debtor.
* * * * *
Appointment 16. (1) * * * * *
and tenure of
interim (2) Where the application for corporate insolvency resolution process is made
resolution by a financial creditor or the corporate debtor, as the case may be, the resolution
professional.
professional, as proposed respectively in the application under section 7 or
section 10, shall be appointed as the interim resolution professional, if no
disciplinary proceedings are pending against him.
* * * * *
(4) The Board shall, within ten days of the receipt of a reference from the
Adjudicating Authority under sub-section (3), recommend the name of an
insolvency professional to the Adjudicating Authority against whom no disciplinary
proceedings are pending.
* * * * *
65
18. The interim resolution professional shall perform the following duties, Duties of interim
resolution
namely:—
professional.
* * * * *
(b) receive and collate all the claims submitted by creditors to him,
pursuant to the public announcement made under sections 13 and 15;
* * * * *
19. (1) The personnel of the corporate debtor, its promoters or any other person Personnel to
extend
associated with the management of the corporate debtor shall extend all assistance
cooperation to
and cooperation to the interim resolution professional as may be required by him in interim
managing the affairs of the corporate debtor. resolution
professional.
(2) Where any personnel of the corporate debtor, its promoter or any other
person required to assist or cooperate with the interim resolution professional does
not assist or cooperate, the interim resolution professional may make an application
to the Adjudicating Authority for necessary directions.
(3) The Adjudicating Authority, on receiving an application under
sub-section (2), shall by an order, direct such personnel or other person to comply
with the instructions of the resolution professional and to cooperate with him in
collection of information and management of the corporate debtor.
* * * * *
22. (1) * * * * * Appointment of
resolution
professional.
(3) Where the committee of creditors resolves under sub-section (2)—
(a) to continue the interim resolution professional as resolution
professional, subject to a written consent from the interim resolution
professional in the specified form it shall communicate its decision to the
interim resolution professional, the corporate debtor and the Adjudicating
Authority; or
* * * * *
25. (1) * * * * * Duties of
resolution
professional.
(2) For the purposes of sub-section (1), the resolution professional shall
undertake the following actions, namely:—
* * * * *
(j) file application for avoidance of transactions in accordance with
Chapter III, if any; and
* * * * *
26. The filing of an avoidance application under clause (j) of sub-section (2) of Application for
avoidance of
section 25 by the resolution professional shall not affect the proceedings of the
transactions not
corporate insolvency resolution process. to affect
proceedings.
* * * * *
Submission of
30. (1) * * * * *
resolution plan.
(2) The resolution professional shall examine each resolution plan received by
him to confirm that each resolution plan—
66
* * * * *
(b) provides for the payment of debts of operational creditors in such
manner as may be specified by the Board which shall not be less than—
(i) the amount to be paid to such creditors in the event of a
liquidation of the corporate debtor under section 53; or
(ii) the amount that would have been paid to such creditors, if the
amount to be distributed under the resolution plan had been distributed
in accordance with the order of priority in sub-section (1) of section 53,
whichever is higher and provides for the payment of debts of financial
creditors, who do not vote in favour of the resolution plan, in such manner as
may be specified by the Board, which shall not be less than the amount to be
paid to such creditors in accordance with sub-section (1) of section 53 in the
event of a liquidation of the corporate debtor.
* * * * *
(d) the implementation and supervision of the resolution plan;
* * * * *
Approval of 31. (1) If the Adjudicating Authority is satisfied that the resolution plan as
resolution plan.
approved by the committee of creditors under sub-section (4) of section 30 meets
the requirements as referred to in sub-section (2) of section 30, it shall by order
approve the resolution plan which shall be binding on the corporate debtor and its
employees, members, creditors, including the Central Government, any State
Government or any local authority to whom a debt in respect of the payment of dues
arising under any law for the time being in force, such as authorities to whom
statutory dues are owed, guarantors and other stakeholders involved in the resolution
plan:
Provided that the Adjudicating Authority shall, before passing an order for
approval of resolution plan under this sub-section, satisfy that the resolution plan
has provisions for its effective implementation.
(2) Where the Adjudicating Authority is satisfied that the resolution plan does
not confirm to the requirements referred to in sub-section (1), it may, by an order,
reject the resolution plan.
* * * * *
(4) The resolution applicant shall, pursuant to the resolution plan approved
under sub-section (1), obtain the necessary approval required under any law for the
time being in force within a period of one year from the date of approval of the
resolution plan by the Adjudicating Authority under sub-section (1) or within such
period as provided for in such law, whichever is later:
Provided that where the resolution plan contains a provision for combination, as
referred to in section 5 of the Competition Act, 2002, the resolution applicant shall 12 of 2003.
obtain the approval of the Competition Commission of India under that Act prior to
the approval of such resolution plan by the committee of creditors.
* * * * *
67
CHAPTER III
LIQUIDATION PROCESS
33. (1) Where the Adjudicating Authority,— Initiation of
liquidation.
(a) before the expiry of the insolvency resolution process period or the
maximum period permitted for completion of the corporate insolvency
resolution process under section 12 or the fast track corporate insolvency
resolution process under section 56, as the case may be, does not receive a
resolution plan under sub-section (6) of section 30; or
(b) rejects the resolution plan under section 31 for the non-compliance
of the requirements specified therein,
it shall—
* * * * *
(ii) issue a public announcement stating that the corporate debtor is in
liquidation; and
* * * * *
(2) Where the resolution professional, at any time during the corporate
insolvency resolution process but before confirmation of resolution plan, intimates
the Adjudicating Authority of the decision of the committee of creditors approved
by not less than sixty-six per cent. of the voting share to liquidate the corporate
debtor, the Adjudicating Authority shall pass a liquidation order as referred to in
sub-clauses (i), (ii) and (iii) of clause (b) of sub-section (1).
Explanation.—For the purposes of this sub-section, it is hereby declared that
the committee of creditors may take the decision to liquidate the corporate debtor,
any time after its constitution under sub-section (1) of section 21 and before the
confirmation of the resolution plan, including at any time before the preparation of
the information memorandum.
(3) Where the resolution plan approved by the Adjudicating Authority under
section 31 or under sub-section (1) of section 54L, is contravened by the concerned
corporate debtor, any person other than the corporate debtor, whose interests are
prejudicially affected by such contravention, may make an application to the
Adjudicating Authority for a liquidation order as referred to in sub-clauses (i), (ii)
and (iii) of clause (b) of sub-section (1).
(4) On receipt of an application under sub-section (3), if the Adjudicating
Authority determines that the corporate debtor has contravened the provisions of the
resolution plan, it shall pass a liquidation order as referred to in sub-clauses (i), (ii)
and (iii) of clause (b) of sub-section (1).
(5) Subject to section 52, when a liquidation order has been passed, no suit or
other legal proceeding shall be instituted by or against the corporate debtor:
Provided that a suit or other legal proceeding may be instituted by the
liquidator, on behalf of the corporate debtor, with the prior approval of the
Adjudicating Authority.
(6) The provisions of sub-section (5) shall not apply to legal proceedings in
relation to such transactions as may be notified by the Central Government in
consultation with any financial sector regulator.
* * * * *
68
Appointment of 34. (1) Where the Adjudicating Authority passes an order for liquidation of
liquidator and
the corporate debtor under section 33, the resolution professional appointed for the
fee to be paid.
corporate insolvency resolution process under Chapter II or for the pre-packaged
insolvency resolution process under Chapter III-A shall, subject to submission of a
written consent by the resolution professional to the Adjudicatory Authority in
specified form, act as the liquidator for the purposes of liquidation unless replaced
by the Adjudicating Authority under sub-section (4).
* * * * *
(3) The personnel of the corporate debtor shall extend all assistance and
cooperation to the liquidator as may be required by him in managing the affairs of
the corporate debtor and provisions of section 19 shall apply in relation to voluntary
liquidation process as they apply in relation to liquidation process with the
substitution of references to the liquidator for references to the interim resolution
professional.
(4) The Adjudicating Authority shall by order replace the resolution
professional, if—
(a) the resolution plan submitted by the resolution professional under
section 30 was rejected for failure to meet the requirements mentioned in
sub-section (2) of section 30; or
(b) the Board recommends the replacement of a resolution professional
to the Adjudicating Authority for reasons to be recorded in writing; or
(c) the resolution professional fails to submit written consent under
sub-section (1).
(5) For the purposes of clauses (a) and (c) of sub-section (4), the Adjudicating
Authority may direct the Board to propose the name of another insolvency
professional to be appointed as a liquidator.
(6) The Board shall propose the name of another insolvency professional along
with written consent from the insolvency professional in the specified form, within
ten days of the direction issued by the Adjudicating Authority under sub-section (5).
(7) The Adjudicating Authority shall, on receipt of the proposal of the Board
for the appointment of an insolvency professional as liquidator, by an order appoint
such insolvency professional as the liquidator.
* * * * *
Powers and 35. (1) Subject to the directions of the Adjudicating Authority, the liquidator
duties of
shall have the following powers and duties, namely:—
liquidator.
(a) to verify claims of all the creditors;
* * * * *
(j) to invite and settle claims of creditors and claimants and distribute
proceeds in accordance with the provisions of this Code;
* * * * *
(l) to investigate the financial affairs of the corporate debtor to determine
undervalued or preferential transactions;
* * * * *
(2) The liquidator shall have the power to consult any of the stakeholders
entitled to a distribution of proceeds under section 53:
Provided that any such consultation shall not be binding on the liquidator:
69
Provided further that the records of any such consultation shall be made
available to all other stakeholders not so consulted, in a manner specified by the
Board.
36. (1) * * * * * Liquidation
estate.
(3) Subject to sub-section (4), the liquidation estate shall comprise all
liquidation estate assets which shall include the following:—
* * * * *
(f) any assets or their value recovered through proceedings for avoidance
of transactions in accordance with this Chapter;
* * * * *
38. (1) The liquidator shall receive or collect the claims of creditors within a Consolidation of
claims.
period of thirty days from the date of the commencement of the liquidation process.
(2) A financial creditor may submit a claim to the liquidator by providing a
record of such claim with an information utility:
Provided that where the information relating to the claim is not recorded in the
information utility, the financial creditor may submit the claim in the same manner
as provided for the submission of claims for the operational creditor under
sub-section (3).
(3) An operational creditor may submit a claim to the liquidator in such form
and in such manner and along with such supporting documents required to prove
the claim as may be specified by the Board.
(4) A creditor who is partly a financial creditor and partly an operational
creditor shall submit claims to the liquidator to the extent of his financial debt in the
manner as provided in sub-section (2) and to the extent of his operational debt under
sub-section (3).
(5) A creditor may withdraw or vary his claim under this section within
fourteen days of its submission.
39. (1) The liquidator shall verify the claims submitted under section 38 within Verification of
such time as specified by the Board. claims.
(2) The liquidator may require any creditor or the corporate debtor or any other
person to produce any other document or evidence which he thinks necessary for
the purpose of verifying the whole or any part of the claim.
40. (1) The liquidator may, after verification of claims under section 39, either Admission or
rejection of
admit or reject the claim, in whole or in part, as the case may be:
claims.
Provided that where the liquidator rejects a claim, he shall record in writing
the reasons for such rejection.
(2) The liquidator shall communicate his decision of admission or rejection of
claims to the creditor and corporate debtor within seven days of such admission or
rejection of claims.
41. The liquidator shall determine the value of claims admitted under D e t e r m i n ation of
valuation of
section 40 in such manner as may be specified by the Board.
claims.
42. A creditor may appeal to the Adjudicating Authority against the decision Appeal against
the decision of
of the liquidator accepting or rejecting the claims within fourteen days of the receipt
liquidator.
of such decision.
70
Preferential 43. (1) * * * * *
transactions and
relevant time. (4) A preference shall be deemed to be given at a relevant time, if—
(a) it is given to a related party (other than by reason only of being an
employee), during the period of two years preceding the insolvency
commencement date; or
(b) a preference is given to a person other than a related party during the
period of one year preceding the insolvency commencement date.
* * * * *
Relevant period 46. (1) In an application for avoiding a transaction at undervalue, the liquidator
for avoidable
or the resolution professional, as the case may be, shall demonstrate that—
transactions.
(i) such transaction was made with any person within the period of one
year preceding the insolvency commencement date; or
(ii) such transaction was made with a related party within the period of
two years preceding the insolvency commencement date.
* * * * *
Application by 47. (1) Where an undervalued transaction has taken place and the liquidator or
creditor in cases
the resolution professional as the case may be, has not reported it to the Adjudicating
of undervalued
transactions. Authority, a creditor, member or a partner of a corporate debtor, as the case may be,
may make an application to the Adjudicating Authority to declare such transactions
void and reverse their effect in accordance with this Chapter.
(2) Where the Adjudicating Authority, after examination of the application
made under sub-section (1), is satisfied that—
(a) undervalued transactions had occurred; and
(b) liquidator or the resolution professional, as the case may be, after
having sufficient information or opportunity to avail information of such
transactions did not report such transaction to the Adjudicating Authority,
it shall pass an order—
(a) restoring the position as it existed before such transactions and
reversing the effects thereof in the manner as laid down in section 45 and
section 48;
(b) requiring the Board to initiate disciplinary proceedings against the
liquidator or the resolution professional as the case may be.
* * * * *
Transactions 49. Where the corporate debtor has entered into an undervalued transaction as
defrauding
referred to in sub-section (2) of section 45 and the Adjudicating Authority is satisfied
creditors.
that such transaction was deliberately entered into by such corporate debtor—
(a) for keeping assets of the corporate debtor beyond the reach of any
person who is entitled to make a claim against the corporate debtor; or
(b) in order to adversely affect the interests of such a person in relation
to the claim,
the Adjudicating Authority shall make an order—
(i) restoring the position as it existed before such transaction as if the
transaction had not been entered into; and
(ii) protecting the interests of persons who are victims of such
transactions:
71
Provided that an order under this section—
(a) shall not affect any interest in property which was acquired from a
person other than the corporate debtor and was acquired in good faith, for
value and without notice of the relevant circumstances, or affect any interest
deriving from such an interest, and
(b) shall not require a person who received a benefit from the transaction
in good faith, for value and without notice of the relevant circumstances to pay
any sum unless he was a party to the transaction.
50. (1) Where the corporate debtor has been a party to an extortionate credit Extortionate
transaction involving the receipt of financial or operational debt during the period credit
transactions.
within two years preceding the insolvency commencement date, the liquidator or
the resolution professional as the case may be, may make an application for
avoidance of such transaction to the Adjudicating Authority if the terms of such
transaction required exorbitant payments to be made by the corporate debtor.
* * * * *
52. (1) * * * * * Second creditor
in liquidation
(2) Where the secured creditor realises security interest under clause (b) of proceedings.
sub-section (1), he shall inform the liquidator of such security interest and identify
the asset subject to such security interest to be realised.
* * * * *
(8) The amount of insolvency resolution process costs, due from secured
creditors who realise their security interests in the manner provided in this section,
shall be deducted from the proceeds of any realisation by such secured creditors,
and they shall transfer such amounts to the liquidator to be included in the
liquidation estate.
(9) Where the proceeds of the realisation of the secured assets are not adequate
to repay debts owed to the secured creditor, the unpaid debts of such secured creditor
shall be paid by the liquidator in the manner specified in clause (e) of
sub-section (1) of section 53.
53. (1) Notwithstanding anything to the contrary contained in any law enacted D istribution of
by the Parliament or any State Legislature for the time being in force, the proceeds assets.
from the sale of the liquidation assets shall be distributed in the following order of
priority and within such period and in such manner as may be specified, namely:—
* * * * *
(b) the following debts which shall rank equally between and among the
following:—
* * * * *
(ii) debts owed to a secured creditor in the event such secured
creditor has relinquished security in the manner set out in section 52;
* * * * *
(e) the following dues shall rank equally between and among the
following:—
(i) any amount due to the Central Government and the State
Government including the amount to be received on account of the
Consolidated Fund of India and the Consolidated Fund of a State, if any,
in respect of the whole or any part of the period of two years preceding
the liquidation commencement date;
* * * * *
(2) Any contractual arrangements between recipients under
sub-section (1) with equal ranking, if disrupting the order of priority under that
sub-section shall be disregarded by the liquidator.
72
* * * * *
Dissolution of 54. (1) Where the assets of the corporate debtor have been completely
corporate debtor. liquidated, the liquidator shall make an application to the Adjudicating Authority
for the dissolution of such corporate debtor.
* * * * *
(3) A copy of an order under sub-section (2) shall within seven days from the
date of such order, be forwarded to the authority with which the corporate debtor is
registered.
CHAPTER III-A
PRE-PACKAGED INSOLVENCY RESOLUTION PROCESS
Corporate 54A. (1) * * * * *
debtors
eligible for (2) Without prejudice to sub-section (1), an application for initiating
pre-packaged
pre-packaged insolvency resolution process may be made in respect of a corporate
insolvency
debtor, who commits a default referred to in section 4, subject to the following
resolution
process. conditions, that—
(a) it has not undergone pre-packaged insolvency resolution process or
completed corporate insolvency resolution process, as the case may be, during
the period of three years preceding the initiation date;
(b) it is not undergoing a corporate insolvency resolution process;
* * * * *
Application 54C. (1) * * * * *
to initiate
pre-packaged (3) The corporate applicant shall, along with the application, furnish—
insolvency
resolution (a) the declaration, special resolution or resolution, as the case may be,
process.
and the approval of financial creditors for initiating pre-packaged insolvency
resolution process in terms of section 54A;
(b) the name and written consent, in such form as may be specified, of
the insolvency professional proposed to be appointed as resolution
professional, as approved under clause (e) of sub-section (2) of section 54A,
and his report as referred to in clause (a) of sub-section (1) of section 54B;
(c) a declaration regarding the existence of any transactions of the
corporate debtor that may be within the scope of provisions in respect of
avoidance of transactions under Chapter III or fraudulent or wrongful trading
under Chapter VI, in such form as may be specified;
(d) information relating to books of account of the corporate debtor and
such other documents relating to such period as may be specified.
* * * * *
Duties and 54F. (1) * * * * *
powers of
resolution (5) The personnel of the corporate debtor, its promoters and any other person
professional associated with the management of the corporate debtor shall extend all assistance
during pre-
and cooperation to the resolution professional as may be required by him to perform
packaged
his duties and exercise his powers, and for such purposes, the provisions of
insolvency
resolution sub-sections (2) and (3) of section 19 shall, mutatis mutandis apply, in relation to
process. the proceedings under this Chapter.
* * * * *
Approval of 54L. (1) * * * * *
resolution
plan.
73
(2) The order of approval under sub-section (1) shall have such effect as
provided under sub-sections (1), (3) and (4) of section 31, which shall, mutatis
mutandis apply, to the proceedings under this Chapter.
(3) Where the Adjudicating Authority is satisfied that the resolution plan does
not conform to the requirements referred to in sub-section (1), it may, within thirty
days of the receipt of such resolution plan, by an order, reject the resolution plan
and pass an order under section 54N.
(4) Notwithstanding anything to the contrary contained in this section, where
the Adjudicating Authority has passed an order under sub-section (2) of section 54J
and the resolution plan approved by the committee of creditors under sub-section (4) or
sub-section (12), as the case may be of section 54K, does not result in the change in
the management or control of the corporate debtor to a person who was not a
promoter or in the management or control of the corporate debtor, the Adjudicating
Authority shall pass an order—
* * * * *
(b) terminating the pre-packaged insolvency resolution process and
passing a liquidation order in respect of the corporate debtor as referred to in
sub-clauses (i), (ii) and (iii) of clause (b) of sub-section (1) of section 33; and
* * * * *
54N. (1) * * * * * Termination
of pre-packaged
(4) Notwithstanding anything to the contrary contained in this section, where insolvency
the Adjudicating Authority has passed an order under sub-section (2) of section 54J resolution
process.
and the pre-packaged insolvency resolution process is required to be terminated
under sub-section (1), the Adjudicating Authority shall pass an order—
(a) of liquidation in respect of the corporate debtor as referred to in
sub-clauses (i), (ii) and (iii) of clause (b) of sub-section (1) of section 33; and
* * * * *
CHAPTER IV
FAST TRACK CORPORATE INSOLVENCY RESOLUTION PROCESS
55. (1) A corporate insolvency resolution process carried out in accordance Fast track
with this Chapter shall be called as fast track corporate insolvency resolution corporate
insolvency
process.
resolution
process.
(2) An application for fast track corporate insolvency resolution process may
be made in respect of the following corporate debtors, namely:—
(a) a corporate debtor with assets and income below a level as may be
notified by the Central Government; or
(b) a corporate debtor with such class of creditors or such amount of debt
as may be notified by the Central Government; or
(c) such other category of corporate persons as may be notified by the
Central Government.
56. (1) Subject to the provisions of sub-section (3), the fast track corporate Time period for
insolvency resolution process shall be completed within a period of ninety days from completion of
fast track
the insolvency commencement date.
corporate
insolvency
(2) The resolution professional shall file an application to the Adjudicating
resolution
Authority to extend the period of the fast track corporate insolvency resolution process.
process beyond ninety days if instructed to do so by a resolution passed at a meeting
of the committee of creditors and supported by a vote of seventy five per cent. of
the voting share.
74
(3) On receipt of an application under sub-section (2), if the Adjudicating
Authority is satisfied that the subject matter of the case is such that fast track corporate
insolvency resolution process cannot be completed within a period of ninety days, it
may, by order, extend the duration of such process beyond the said period of ninety days
by such further period, as it thinks fit, but not exceeding forty-five days:
Provided that any extension of the fast track corporate insolvency resolution
process under this section shall not be granted more than once.
Manner of 57. An application for fast track corporate insolvency resolution process may
initiating fast
be filed by a creditor or corporate debtor as the case may be, along with—
track corporate
insolvency (a) the proof of the existence of default as evidenced by records available
resolution
with an information utility or such other means as may be specified by the
process.
Board; and
(b) such other information as may be specified by the Board to establish
that the corporate debtor is eligible for fast track corporate insolvency
resolution process.
58. The process for conducting a corporate insolvency resolution process
Applicability of
Chapter II to this under Chapter II and the provisions relating to offences and penalties under
Chapter. Chapter VII shall apply to this Chapter as the context may require.
CHAPTER V
VOLUNTARY LIQUIDATION OF CORPORATE PERSONS
Voluntary 59. (1) * * * * *
liquidation of
corporate (2) The voluntary liquidation of a corporate person under sub-section (1) shall
persons. meet such conditions and procedural requirements as may be specified by the Board.
(3) Without prejudice to sub-section (2), voluntary liquidation proceedings of a
corporate person registered as a company shall meet the following conditions, namely:—
* * * * *
(b) the declaration under sub-clause (a) shall be accompanied with the
following documents, namely:—
* * * * *
(ii) a report of the valuation of the assets of the company, if any
prepared by a registered valuer;
* * * * *
(4) The company shall notify the Registrar of Companies and the Board about
the resolution under sub-section (3) to liquidate the company within seven days of
such resolution or the subsequent approval by the creditors, as the case may be.
* * * * *
(6) The provisions of sections 35 to 53 of Chapter III and Chapter VII shall
apply to voluntary liquidation proceedings for corporate persons with such
modifications as may be necessary.
* * * * *
Fraudulent or 65. (1) * * * * *
malicious
(3) If any person initiates the pre-packaged insolvency resolution process—
initiation of
proceedings.
(a) fraudulently or with malicious intent for any purpose other than for
the resolution of insolvency; or
(b) with the intent to defraud any person,
the Adjudicating Authority may impose upon such person a penalty which shall not
be less than one lakh rupees, but may extend to one crore rupees.
75
66. (1) If during the corporate insolvency resolution process or a liquidation Fraudulent
process, it is found that any business of the corporate debtor has been carried on trading or
wrongful
with intent to defraud creditors of the corporate debtor or for any fraudulent purpose,
trading.
the Adjudicating Authority may on the application of the resolution professional
pass an order that any persons who were knowingly parties to the carrying on of the
business in such manner shall be liable to make such contributions to the assets of
the corporate debtor as it may deem fit.
(2) On an application made by a resolution professional during the corporate
insolvency resolution process, the Adjudicating Authority may by an order direct that
a director or partner of the corporate debtor, as the case may be, shall be liable to make
such contribution to the assets of the corporate debtor as it may deem fit, if—
* * * * *
67A. On and after the pre-packaged insolvency commencement date, where an Fraudulent
management
officer of the corporate debtor manages its affairs with the intent to defraud creditors of
of corporate
the corporate debtor or for any fraudulent purpose, the Adjudicating Authority may, on an
debtor during
application by the resolution professional, pass an order imposing upon any such officer, pre-packaged
a penalty which shall not be less than one lakh rupees, but may extend to one crore rupees. insolvency
resolution
* * * * * process.
99. (1) The resolution professional shall examine the application referred to in section Submission of
94 or section 95, as the case may be, within ten days of his appointment, and submit a report report by
resolution
to the Adjudicating Authority recommending for approval or rejection of the application.
professional.
* * * * *
(10) The resolution professional shall give a copy of the report under
sub-section (7) to the debtor or the creditor, as the case may be.
* * * * *
106. (1) * * * * * Report of
resolution
(4) For the purposes of sub-section (3)—
professional on
(a) the date on which the meeting is to be held shall be not less than repayment plan.
fourteen days and not more than twenty-eight days from the date of submission
of report under sub-section (1);
(b) the resolution professional shall consider the convenience of creditors
in fixing the date and venue of the meeting of the creditors.
* * * * *
CHAPTER IV
BANKRUPTCY ORDER FOR INDIVIDUALS AND PARTNERSHIP FIRM
121. (1) An application for bankruptcy of a debtor may be made, by a creditor Application for
bankruptcy.
individually or jointly with other creditors or by a debtor, to the Adjudicating
Authority in the following circumstances, namely;—
* * * * *
(c) where an order has been passed by an Adjudicating Authority under
sub-section 3 of section 118.
* * * * *
178.(1) Notwithstanding anything to the contrary contained in any law enacted by Priority of
payment of
the Parliament or the State Legislature for the time being in force, in the distribution of the
debts.
final dividend, the following debts shall be paid in priority to all other debts—
* * * * *
(d) fourthly, any amount due to the Central Government and the State
Government including the amount to be received on account of Consolidated
Fund of India and the Consolidated Fund of a State, if any, in respect of the
whole or any part of the period of two years preceding the bankruptcy
commencement date;
* * * * *
76
CHAPTER II
POWER AND PUNCTIONS OF THE BOARD
Powers and 196. (1) The Board shall, subject to the general direction of the Central
functions of Government, perform all or any of the following functions namely:—
Board.
(a) register insolvency professional agencies, insolvency professionals
and information utilities and renew, withdraw, suspend or cancel such
registrations;
(aa) promote the development of, and regulate, the working and
practices of, insolvency professionals, insolvency professional agencies and
information utilities and other institutions, in furtherance of the purposes of
this Code;
(b) specify the minimum eligibility requirements for registration of
insolvency professional agencies, insolvency professionals and information
utilities;
(c)levy fee or other charges for carrying out the purposes of this Code,
including fee for registration and renewal of insolvency professional agencies,
insolvency professionals and information utilities;
(d) specify by regulations standards for the functioning of insolvency
professional agencies, insolvency professionals and information utilities;
(e)lay down by regulations the minimum curriculum for the examination
of the insolvency professionals for their enrolment as members of the
insolvency professional agencies;
(f) carry out inspections and investigations on insolvency professional
agencies, insolvency professionals and information utilities and pass such
orders as may be required for compliance of the provisions of this Code and
the regulations issued hereunder;
(g) monitor the performance of insolvency professional agencies,
insolvency professionals and information utilities and pass any directions as
may be required for compliance of the provisions of this Code and the
regulations issued hereunder;
(h)call for any information and records from the insolvency professional
agencies, insolvency professionals and information utilities;
* * * * *
(p) issue necessary guidelines to the insolvency professional agencies,
insolvency professionals and information utilities;
(q) specify mechanism for redressal of grievances against insolvency
professionals, insolvency professional agencies and information utilities and
pass orders relating to complaints filed against the aforesaid for compliance of
the provisions of this Code and the regulations issued hereunder;
(r) conduct periodic study, research and audit the functioning and
performance of to the insolvency professional agencies, insolvency
professionals and information utilities at such intervals as may be specified by
the Board;
* * * * *
(t)make regulations and guidelines on matters relating to insolvency and
bankruptcy as may be required under this Code, including mechanism for time
bound disposal of the assets of the corporate debtor or debtor; and
* * * * *
Obligation of 214. For the purposes of providing core services to any person, every
information utility. information utility shall—
* * * * *
77
(e) get the information received from various persons authenticated by
all concerned parties before storing such information;
* * * * *
215. (1) Any person who intends to submit financial information to the Procedure for
information utility or access the information from the information utility shall pay submission, etc.,
of financial
such fee and submit information in such form and manner as may be specified by
information.
regulations.
* * * * *
(3) An operational creditor may submit financial information to the
information utility in such form and manner as may be specified.
* * * * *
CHAPTER VI
INSPECTION AND INVESTIGATION
217. Any person aggrieved by the functioning of an insolvency professional Complaints
agency or insolvency professional or an information utility may file a complaint to against
insolvency
the Board in such form, within such time and in such manner as may be specified. professional
agency or its
member or
information
utility.
218. (1) Where the Board, on receipt of a complaint under section 217 or has
Investigation of
reasonable grounds to believe that any insolvency professional agency or insolvency insolvency
professional or an information utility has contravened any of the provisions of the professional
agency or its
Code or the rules or regulations made or directions issued by the Board thereunder,
member or
it may, at any time by an order in writing, direct any person or persons to act as an information
investigating authority to conduct an inspection or investigation of the insolvency utility.
professional agency or insolvency professional or an information utility.
* * * * *
219. The Board may, upon completion of an inspection or investigation under Show cause
section 218, issue a show cause notice to such insolvency professional agency or notice to
insolvency
insolvency professional or information utility, and carry out inspection of such
professional
insolvency professional agency or insolvency professional or information utility in agency or its
such manner, giving such time for giving reply, as may be specified by regulations. member or
information
utility.
220. (1) The Board shall constitute a disciplinary committee to consider the Appointment of
reports of the investigating Authority submitted under sub-section (6) of d i s ciplinary
committee.
section 218:
Provided that the members of the disciplinary committee shall consist of
whole-time members of the Board only.
(2) On the examination of the report of the Investigating Authority, if the
disciplinary committee is satisfied that sufficient cause exists, it may impose penalty
as specified in sub-section (3) or suspend or cancel the registration of the insolvency
professional or, suspend or cancel the registration of insolvency professional agency
or information utility as the case may be.
(3) Where any insolvency professional agency or insolvency professional or
an information utility has contravened any provision of this Code or rules or
regulations made thereunder, the disciplinary committee may impose penalty which
shall be—
* * * * *
78
Provided that where such loss or unlawful gain is not quantifiable, the total
amount of the penalty imposed shall not exceed more than one crore rupees.
(4) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (3), the Board may
direct any person who has made unlawful gain or averted loss by indulging in any
activity in contravention of this Code, or the rules or regulations made thereunder,
to disgorge an amount equivalent to such unlawful gain or aversion of loss.
(5) The Board may take such action as may be required to provide restitution
to the person who suffered loss on account of any contravention from the amount so
disgorged, if the person who suffered such loss is identifiable and the loss so suffered
is directly attributable to such person.
* * * * *
PART V
MISCELLANEOUS
Insolvency and 224. (1) * * * * *
Bankruptcy
(2) There shall be credited to the Fund the following amounts, namely—
Fund.
* * * * *
(c) the amount received in the Fund from any other source; and
(d) the interest or other income received out of the investment made from
the Fund.
(3) A person who has contributed any amount to the Fund may, in the event of
proceedings initiated in respect of such person under this Code before an
Adjudicating Authority, make an application to such Adjudicating Authority for
withdrawal of funds not exceeding the amount contributed by it, for making
payments to workmen, protecting the assets of such persons, meeting the incidental
costs during the proceedings or such other purposes as may be prescribed.
* * * * *
235A. If any person contravenes any of the provisions of this Code or the rules
Punishment
where no or regulations made thereunder for which no penalty or punishment is provided in
specific penalty this Code, such person shall be punishable with fine which shall not be less than one
or punishment is
lakh rupees but which may extend to two crore rupees.
provided.
* * * * *
Power to make 239. (1) The Central Government may, by notification, make rules for carrying
rules. out the provisions of this Code.
(2) Without prejudice to the generality of the provisions of sub-section (1),
the Central Government may make rules for any of the following matters, namely:—
* * * * *
(ea) other proof confirming that there is no payment of an unpaid
operational debt by the corporate debtor or such other information under
clause (e) of sub-section (3) of section 9;
* * * * *
(zi) the purpose for which application for withdrawal of funds may be
made under sub-section (3) of section 224;
* * * * *
Power to make 240. (1) The Board may, by notification, make regulations consistent with this
regulations.
Code and the rules made thereunder, to carry out the provisions of this Code.
79
(2) In particular, and without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing power,
such regulations may provide for all or any of the following matters, namely:—
* * * * *
(h) the period under clause (a) of sub-section (3) of section 10;
* * * * *
(n) the other matters under sub-clause (iv) of clause (a), and the other
duties to be performed by the interim resolution professional under clause (g),
of section 18;
* * * * *
(w) the manner of making payment of insolvency resolution process
costs under clause (a), the manner of payment of debts under clause (b), and
the other requirements to which a resolution plan shall conform to under
clause (d), of sub-section (2) of section 30;
(x) the fee for the conduct of the liquidation proceedings and proportion
to the value of the liquidation estate assets under sub-section (8) of section 34;
(y) the manner of evaluating the assets and property of the
corporate debtor under clause (c), the manner of selling property in parcels
under clause (f), the manner of reporting progress of the liquidation process
under clause (n), and the other functions to be performed under clause (o), of
sub-section (1) of section 35;
(z) the manner of making the records available to other stakeholders
under sub-section (2) of section 35;
* * * * *
(ze) the form, the manner and the supporting documents to be submitted
by operational creditor to prove the claim under sub-section (3) of section 38;
(zf) the time within which the liquidator shall verify the claims under
sub-section (1) of section 39;
(zg) the manner of determining the value of claims under section 41;
* * * * *
(zk) the period and the manner of distribution of proceeds of sale under
sub-section (1) of section 53;
* * * * *
(zke) the form for providing written consent of the insolvency
professional under clause (b), the form for declaration under clause (c), the
information relating to books of account and such other documents relating to
such period under clause (d) of sub-section (3) of section 54C;
* * * * *
(zl) the other means under clause (a) and the other information under
clause (b) of section 57;
(zm) the conditions and procedural requirements under sub-section (2)
of section 59;
* * * * *
(zv) the intervals in which the periodic study, research and audit of
the functioning and performance of the insolvency professional agencies,
insolvency professionals and information utilities under clause (r), and mechanism
for disposal of assets under clause (t), of sub-section (1) of section 196;
* * * * *
(zzza) the manner of carrying out inspection of insolvency professional
agency or insolvency professional or information utility and the time for
giving reply under section 219;
* * * * *
LOK SABHA
————
A
BILL
further to amend the Insolvency and Bankruptcy Code, 2016.
————
(Smt. Nirmala Sitharaman, Minister of Finance and Corporate Affairs)
