AS INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA
Bill No. 79 of 2026
THE TRANSGENDER PERSONS (PROTECTION OF RIGHTS)
AMENDMENT BILL, 2026
A
BILL
to amend the Transgender Persons (Protection of Rights) Act, 2019.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Seventy-seventh Year of the Republic of
India as follows:—
1.(1) This Act may be called the Transgender Persons (Protection of Rights) Short title and
commencement.
Amendment Act, 2026.
5 (2) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by
notification in the Official Gazette, appoint.
40 of 2019. 2. In section 2 of the Transgender Persons (Protection of Rights) Act, 2019 Amendment of
section 2.
(hereinafter referred to as the principal Act),—
(i)for clause (a), the following clause shall be substituted, namely:—
2
‘(a) “appropriate Government” means—
(i) in relation to the Central Government or any
establishment wholly or substantially financed by that
Government, the Central Government;
(ii) in relation to a State Government or any establishment 5
wholly or substantially financed by that Government, or any local
authority within a State, the State Government;
(iii) in relation to a Union territory or any establishment
wholly or substantially financed by the Central Government in that
Union territory, the Administrator thereof appointed under article 10
239 of the Constitution or such authority as may be specified by
the Central Government;’;
(ii) after clause (a), the following clause shall be inserted, namely:—
‘(aa) “authority” means a medical board, headed by a Chief Medical
Officer or a Deputy Chief Medical Officer, as may be appointed by the 15
Central Government, State Government or Union territory
Administration;’;
(iii) clause (i) shall be omitted;
(iv) for clause (k), the following clause shall be substituted, namely:—
‘(k) “transgender person” means— 20
(i) a person having such socio-cultural identities as kinner,
hijra, aravani and jogta, or eunuch, or a person with intersex
variations specified below or a person who, at birth, has a
congenital variation in one or more of the following sex
characteristics as compared to male or female development:— 25
(a) primary sexual characteristics;
(b) external genitalia;
(c) chromosomal patterns;
(d) gonadal development;
(e) endogenous hormone production or response, or
30
such other medical conditions; or
(ii) any person or child who has been, by force, allurement,
inducement, deceit or undue influence, either with or without
consent, compelled to assume, adopt, or outwardly present a
transgender identity, by mutilation, emasculation, castration, 35
amputation, or any surgical, chemical, or hormonal procedure or
otherwise:
Provided that it shall not include, nor shall ever have been so
included, persons with different sexual orientations and self-perceived
sexual identities.’. 40
Amendment 3. In section 4 of the principal Act, sub-section (2) shall be omitted.
of section 4.
4. In section 6 of the principal Act,—
Amendment of
section 6.
(a) in sub-section (1), for the words “District Magistrate”, the words
“District Magistrate, after examining the recommendation of the authority 45
and, if he considers either necessary or desirable, after taking the assistance of
other medical experts” shall be substituted;
3
(b) after sub-section (3), the following sub-section shall be inserted,
namely:—
“(4) The person who has been issued a certificate of identity under
sub-section (1) and is so declared as a transgender person within the
definition under this Act shall be entitled to change the first name in the
5
birth certificate and all other official documents relating to the identity
of such person.”.
5.In section 7 of the principal Act,— Amendment of
section 7.
(a)in sub-section (1), for the words “such person may”, the words “such
10 person shall” shall be substituted;
(b) after sub-section (1), the following sub-section shall be inserted,
namely:—
“(1A) The medical institution in which the person who has
undergone surgery to change gender, either as male or female, shall
15 furnish the details of such person to the concerned District Magistrate
and the authority in such form and manner as may be prescribed.”;
(c) for sub-section (2), the following sub-section shall be substituted,
namely:—
“(2) A person referred to in sub-section (1) shall also make an
20 application to the District Magistrate who shall, on receipt of an application
along with the certificate issued by the Medical Superintendent or Chief
Medical Officer, and on being satisfied with the correctness of such
certificate, issue a certificate indicating change in gender in such form and
manner and within such time, as may be prescribed.”;
25 (d)sub-section (3) and the proviso shall be omitted.
6. In section 16 of the principal Act, in sub-section (2), for clause (f), the Amendment of
following clause shall be substituted, namely:— section 16.
“(f) representatives of the State Governments and Union territories
Administration, by rotation, one each from North, South, East, West and
30 North-East regions, not below the rank of Director in the concerned Ministry
or Department, to be nominated by the Central Government, Members,
ex officio;”.
7. For section 18 of the principal Act, the following section shall be Substitution of
substituted, namely:— new section for
section 18.
35 “18. Whoever,—
Offences and
penalties.
(a)compels or entices a transgender person to indulge in the act of
forced or bonded labour other than any compulsory service for public
purposes imposed by Government, shall be punishable with
imprisonment for a term which shall not be less than six months but
40 which may extend to two years and with fine;
(b) denies a transgender person the right of passage to a public
place or obstructs such person from using or having access to a public
place to which other members have access to or a right to use, shall be
punishable with imprisonment for a term which shall not be less than six
45 months but which may extend to two years and with fine;
(c) forces or causes a transgender person to leave household,
village or other place of residence, shall be punishable with
imprisonment for a term which shall not be less than six months but
which may extend to two years and with fine;
4
(d) harms or injures or endangers the life, safety, health or
well-being, whether mental or physical, of a transgender person or tends
to do acts including causing physical abuse, sexual abuse, verbal and
emotional abuse and economic abuse, shall be punishable with
imprisonment for a term which shall not be less than six months but 5
which may extend to two years and with fine;
(e)kidnaps or abducts any adult person and causes—
(i) grievous hurt to such person, whether by mutilation,
emasculation, castration, amputation, or any surgical, chemical, or
hormonal procedure; or 10
(ii) permanent or severe injury to the body or bodily
functions of such person,
with the intent of, or in the course of, compelling such person to assume,
adopt, or outwardly present a transgender identity against the will or
consent of such person, whether by force, allurement, deceit, undue 15
influence or otherwise, shall be punishable with rigorous imprisonment
for a term which shall not be less than ten years but which may extend
to imprisonment for life, and shall also be liable to fine which shall not
be less than two lakh rupees;
(f)kidnaps or abducts any child and causes— 20
(i) grievous hurt to such child, whether by mutilation,
emasculation, castration, amputation, or any surgical, chemical, or
hormonal procedure; or
(ii) permanent or severe injury to the body or bodily
functions of such child,
25
with the intent of, or in the course of, compelling such child to assume,
adopt, or outwardly present a transgender identity, whether by force,
allurement, deceit, undue influence or otherwise, shall be punishable
with rigorous imprisonment for life, and shall also be liable to fine which
shall not be less than five lakh rupees;
(g) by force, threat, coercion, allurement, deception, inducement,
30
or undue influence—
(i) compels any person, whether or not such person is a
transgender person, to dress, present, or conduct themselves
outwardly as a transgender person against the will of such person; and
(ii) employs, uses, or causes such person to engage in 35
begging, solicitation, servitude, or any other form of forced or
bonded labour while so presenting,
shall be punishable with rigorous imprisonment for a term which shall
not be less than five years but which may extend to ten years, and shall
also be liable to fine which shall not be less than one lakh rupees; and 40
(h) by force, threat, coercion, allurement, deception, inducement,
undue influence or otherwise—
(i) compels any child, whether or not such child is a
transgender person, to dress, present, or conduct themselves
outwardly as a transgender person; and 45
4
(ii)employs, uses, or causes such child to engage in begging,
solicitation, servitude, or any other form of forced or bonded
labour while so presenting,
5
shall be punishable with rigorous imprisonment for a term which shall not
be less than ten years but which may extend to fourteen years, and shall
also be liable to fine which shall not be less than three lakh rupees.”.
8. In section 22 of the principal Act, in sub-section (2),—
Amendment of
section 22.
(a) in clause (c), after the word, brackets and figure “sub-section (1)”,
5
the words, brackets, figure and letter “and the form and manner of details to
be furnished by the medical institution under sub-section (1A),” shall be
inserted;
(b) in clause (d), the word “revised” shall be omitted.
STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
It is the legislative policy to recognise a specific class of transgender persons,
who face social issues and to create a regime for their protection. The legislative
policy was and is intended to protect only those who face severe social exclusion
due to biological reasons for no fault of their own and no choice of their own.
2. Over the course of time, during the implementation of this enactment,
certain doubts and difficulties have arisen and are likely to arise with regard to the
expanse of the definition of transgender persons and how the identification of such
persons is to be done under the existing definition. This is critical to the
implementation of the Act, as it is of prime importance that the enactment is utilised
and works towards only those who are in actual need of such protection.
3. The intent, object and purpose of the Act is and was to protect a specified
class of persons socially and culturally known as transgender people who face
societal discrimination of an extreme and oppressive nature. The purpose was and
is not to protect each and every class of persons with various gender identities, self-
perceived sex/gender identities or gender fluidities.
4. The existing vague definition of the expression “transgender person” not
only makes it impossible to identify the genuine oppressed persons to whom the
benefits of the Act are intended to reach, but also makes the operation and
enforcement of several provisions under penal, civil and personal laws unworkable.
Such a vague and broad definition of the expression “transgender person” is found
to have created complex issues in the working of statutory enactments, as this vague
definition is not compatible with several statutory provisions of several enactments
enacted both by the Parliament and the State Legislatures. Any enactment conferring
rights, privileges and protections cannot have a definition clause whereby the status
entitling such rights, privileges and protections can be acquired.
5. It is therefore imperative to give a precise definition for proper and
definitive identification and protection of transgender persons to whom the benefits
of the Act must reach. The protection and benefits that are provided under the Act
are vast in nature, and therefore, care has to be taken that such identification cannot
be extended on the basis of any acquirable characteristics or personal choice or
claimed self-perceived identity of an individual.
6. The Bill also contains provisions for designation of an authority and
provisions providing the relevant authorities the option to seek expert advice if
required. The Bill also seek to empower the transgender persons to make
consequential changes in official documents. The Bill further provides for a change
in the constitution of the National Council ensuring that persons, not below the rank
of Director, form a part of the same as representatives of the State Governments and
Union territories administration, by rotation, one each from North, South, East, West
and North-East regions.
7. The Transgender Persons (Protection of Rights) Act, 2019 prohibits
discrimination and abuse against transgender persons but its penal provision under
section 18, as presently enacted, addresses only general wrongs and criminal
offences and prescribes a maximum of two years’ imprisonment. It does not
adequately address offences of exceptional gravity that have been documented in
practice. The abduction of adults and children, the infliction of reversible or
irreversible bodily harm upon them through mutilation, emasculation, castration,
hormone therapies / other similar therapies or chemical alteration, and their forced
assumption of a transgender identity, frequently as a prelude to economic and other
forms of exploitation including but not limited to begging or servitude has been
observed. While scattered provisions of the Bharatiya Nyaya Sanhita, 2023 and the
Juvenile Justice (Care and Protection of Children) Act, 2015 address individual
6
7
elements of these wrongs, no existing provision treats this conjunction of abduction,
permanent bodily harm, and forced identity as a unified penal approach.
8. The Bill, therefore, also proposes to substitute section 18 of the principal
Act, creating specific offences with graded punishments that reflect the gravity of
the harm, the irreversibility of the injury, and the particular vulnerability of child
victims. The proposed provisions operate cumulatively with the general criminal
law and give legislative expression to the constitutional guarantees that every
person’s bodily integrity is inviolable, that no person may be subjected to forced
labour or traffic in human beings.
9. The Bill seeks to achieve the above objectives.
NEW DELHI;
The 12th March, 2026. DR. VIRENDRA KUMAR.
7
FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM
The Transgender Persons (Protection of Rights) Amendment Bill, 2026, if
enacted, is not likely to involve any expenditure of recurring or non-recurring nature
from and out of the Consolidated Fund of India.
8
MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION
Clause 5 of the Bill seeks to insert sub-section (1A) in section 7 of the
Transgender Persons (Protection of Rights) Act, 2019. The aforesaid sub-section of
the said section empowers the appropriate Government to make rules to provide for
the form and manner of details of a person who has undergone surgery to change
gender, either male or female, to be furnished by the medical institutions.
The matters in respect of which rules may be made and notification issued are
matters of procedure and administrative detail, and it is not practicable to provide
for them in the proposed legislation itself. The delegation of legislative power is,
therefore, of a normal character.
9
ANNEXURE
EXTRACTS FROM THE TRANSGENDER PERSONS (PROTECTION OF RIGHTS) ACT, 2019
(40 OF 2019)
* * * * *
Definitions. 2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,—
(a) “appropriate Government” means,—
(i) in relation to the Central Government or any establishment,
wholly or substantially financed by that Government, the Central
Government;
(ii) in relation to a State Government or any establishment, wholly
or substantially financed by that Government, or any local authority, the
State Government;
* * * * *
(i) “person with intersex variations” means a person who at birth shows
variation in his or her primary sexual characteristics, external genitalia,
chromosomes or hormones from normative standard of male or female body;
* * * * *
(k) “transgender person” means a person whose gender does not match
with the gender assigned to that person at birth and includes trans-man or
trans-woman (whether or not such person has undergone Sex Reassignment
Surgery or hormone therapy or laser therapy or such other therapy), person
with intersex variations, genderqueer and person having such socio-cultural
identities as kinner, hijra, aravani and jogta.
* * * * *
CHAPTER III
RECOGNITION OF IDENTITY OF TRANSGENDER PERSONS
Recognition of 4. (1) * * * * *
identity of
transgender (2) A person recognised as transgender under sub-section (1) shall have a right
person.
to self-perceived gender identity.
* * * * *
Issue of 6. (1) The District Magistrate shall issue to the applicant under section 5, a
certificate of
certificate of identity as transgender person after following such procedure and in
identity.
such form and manner, within such time, as may be prescribed indicating the gender
of such person as transgender.
* * * * *
Change in 7. (1) After the issue of a certificate under sub-section (1) of section 6, if a
gender.
transgender person undergoes surgery to change gender either as a male or female,
such person may make an application, along with a certificate issued to that effect
by the Medical Superintendent or Chief Medical Officer of the medical institution
in which that person has undergone surgery, to the District Magistrate for revised
certificate, in such form and manner as may be prescribed.
(2) The District Magistrate shall, on receipt of an application along with the
certificate issued by the Medical Superintendent or Chief Medical Officer, and on
being satisfied with the correctness of such certificate, issue a certificate indicating
change in gender in such form and manner and within such time, as may be
prescribed.
10
11
(3) The person who has been issued a certificate of identity under section 6 or
a revised certificate under sub-section (2) shall be entitled to change the first name
in the birth certificate and all other official documents relating to the identity of such
person:
Provided that such change in gender and the issue of revised certificate under
sub-section (2) shall not affect the rights and entitlements of such person under this
Act.
* * * * *
CHAPTER VII
NATIONAL COUNCIL FOR TRANGENDER PERSONS
16. (1) * * * * * National Council
for Transgender
(2) The National Council shall consist of— Persons.
* * * * *
(f) representatives of the State Governments and Union territories by
rotation, one each from the North, South, East, West and North-East regions,
to be nominated by the Central Government, Members, ex officio;
* * * * *
CHAPTER VIII
OFFENCES AND PENALTIES
18. Whoever,— Offences and
penalties.
(a) compels or entices a transgender person to indulge in the act of forced
or bonded labour other than any compulsory service for public purposes
imposed by Government;
(b) denies a transgender person the right of passage to a public place or
obstructs such person from using or having access to a public place to which
other members have access to or a right to use;
(c) forces or causes a transgender person to leave household, village or
other place of residence; and
(d) harms or injures or endangers the life, safety, health or well-being,
whether mental or physical, of a transgender person or tends to do acts including
causing physical abuse, sexual abuse, verbal and emotional abuse and economic
abuse, shall be punishable with imprisonment for a term which shall not be less
than six months but which may extend to two years and with fine.
* * * * *
22. (1) * * * * * Power of
appropriate
(2) In particular, and without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing Government to
power, such rules may provide for all or any of the following matters, namely:— make rules.
* * * * *
(c) the form and manner in which an application shall be made under
sub-section (1) of section 7;
(d) the form, period and manner for issuing revised certificate under
sub-section (2) of section 7;
* * * * *
LOK SABHA
————
A
BILL
to amend the Transgender Persons (Protection of Rights) Act, 2019.
————
(Dr. Virendra Kumar, Minister of Social Justice and Empowerment)
