jftLVªh lañ Mhñ ,yñ—¼,u½04@0007@2003—25 REGISTERED NO. DL—(N)04/0007/2003—25
सी.जी.-डीx.एxलx.G-अID.-2H11x2x2x025-268696
CG-DL-E-21122025-268696
xxxGIDExxx
vlk/kkj.k
EXTRAORDINARY
Hkkx II — [k.M 1
PART II — Section 1
izkf/kdkj ls izdkf'kr
PUBLISHED BY AUTHORITY
lañ 60] ubZ fnYyh] jfookj] fnlEcj 21] 2025@vxzgk;.k 30] 1947 ¼'kd½
No. 60] NEW DELHI, SUNDAY, DECEMBER 21, 2025/AGRAHAYANA 30, 1947 (Saka)
bl Hkkx esa fHkUu i`"B la[;k nh tkrh gS ftlls fd ;g vyx ladyu ds :i esa j[kk tk ldsA
Separate paging is given to this Part in order that it may be filed as a separate compilation.
MINISTRY OF LAW AND JUSTICE
(Legislative Department)
New Delhi, the 21st December, 2025/Agrahayana 30, 1947 (Saka)
The following Act of Parliament received the assent of the President on the
20th December, 2025 and is hereby published for general information:—
BillNo. 197-F of 2025
THE VIKSIT BHARAT—GUARANTEE FOR ROZGAR AND
TAHJEE EVVIKIKSAIT M BIHSASIROANT (—GRGAUMARINA)N: VTEBE— FGO RRA RMO ZGG (A fo R d A fl N r D
Hkkjr—th jke th) ACT, 2025
AJEEVIKA MISSION (GRAMIN): VB—G RAM G (विकिित
भारत—Nजoी.र 3ाम6 जofी) 2B0I2L5L, 2025
(AS PASSED BY THE HOUSES OF PARLIAM[E2N0Tt)h December, 2025.]
An Act to establish a rural develoApment framework aligned with the
national vision of Viksit BhaBraILt L@2047, by providing a statutory
guarantee of one hundred and twenty-five days of wage employment
to establish a rural development framework aligned with the national vision of Viksit
inB haervaet ry@ 2fi0n47a,n cbiya lp ryoeviadri ngto a esvtaetruyto rryu rgaula rhaontuesee hoof lodn ew hhuonsder eda daunldt
mtweemntbye-frisv ev odaluyns toefe wr atog eu enmdpelrotaymkee nut ninsk eivlleerdy fminaannuciaall wyeoarrk t;o t oev perryo mruortael
ehmoupsoewhoelrdm wehnot,s eg raodwultth m, ceomnbveresr gveonlucnet eaenrd t os autundraetritoakne founr sak ipllreods pmearnouuasl
work; to promote empowerment, growth, convergence and saturation for a
and resilient rural Bharat; and for matters connected therewith or
prosperous and resilient rural Bharat; and for matters connected therewith or
incidental thereto.
incidental thereto.
WHEREAS to align the rural development framework with the national vision
of5 Viksit Bharat @2047 by providing an enhanced statutory wage employment
guarantee of one hundred and twenty-five days in each financial year to such rural
households whose adult members volunteer to undertake unskilled manual
work, thereby enabling them to participate more effectively in the expanded
livelihood security framework;
2 THE GAZETTE OF IND2IA EXTRAORDINARY [Part II—
AND WHEREAS to focus on empowerment, growth, convergence and
saturation through public works aggregating into forming Viksit Bharat
National Rural Infrastructure Stack, with a thematic focus on water security
through water-related works, core rural infrastructure, livelihood-related
infrastructure and special works to mitigate extreme weather events;
AND WHEREAS to facilitate adequate farm-labour availability during peak
agricultural seasons, and, in view of the wage employment guarantee for the rural
workforce;
ANDWHEREAS to institutionalise convergence, saturation-driven planning and
whole of government delivery through Viksit Gram Panchayat Plans, integrated
with the PM Gati Shakti to address the varying needs of Gram Panchayats, and
powered by geospatial systems, digital public infrastructure, District and State
planning mechanisms, with such plans aggregated at the Block, District, State and
National levels;
AND WHEREAS to modernise governance, accountability and citizen
engagement through a comprehensive digital ecosystem, including biometric
authentication at various levels, global positioning system or mobile based
worksite monitoring, real-time management information system dashboards,
proactive public disclosures, and use of Artificial Intelligence for planning,
audits and fraud-risk mitigation.
BEitenactedbyParliamentintheSeventy-sixthYearoftheRepublicofIndia
asfollows:—
CHAPTERI
PRELIMINARY
Short title and 1.(1)This Act may be called the Viksit Bharat—Guarantee for Rozgar and
commencement. Ajeevika Mission (Gramin):VB—GRAMG(विकिितभारत—जीरामजी)Act, 2025.
(2) It shall come intoforceon suchdateastheCentralGovernment may,by
notification, appoint:
Provided that the different dates may be appointed for different States or for
different areas in a State and any reference in any such provision to the
commencement of this Act shall be construed as a reference to the coming into
force of that provision in such State or, as the case may be, in such area.
Definitions. 2.In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,—
(a) “adult” means a person who has completed the eighteenth year
ofage;
(b) “applicant” means the head of a household or any of its other adult
members who has applied for employment underthe Scheme;
(c) “Block” means a community development area within a district
comprising a group of Gram Panchayats;
(d) “Central Council” means the Central Gramin Rozgar Guarantee
Councilconstituted under section 12;
(e) “Centrally Sponsored Scheme” means a scheme in which the
Central Government provides full or partial financial assistance and
the State Governments undertake its implementation;
(f) “District Programme Coordinator” means an officer of the State
Government designated as such officer under sub-section (1) of section 17
for the implementation of the Scheme in a district;
Sec. 1] THE GAZETTE OF IND3IA EXTRAORDINARY 3
(g)“household” means the members of a family related to each other by
blood, marriage or adoption and normally residing together and sharing meals
or holding a common ration card;
(h) “implementing agency” includes any department of the Central
Government or a State Government, a Zila Parishad, Panchayat at
intermediate level, Gram Panchayat or any local authority or the Government
undertaking, to undertake the implementation of any work taken up under
the Scheme;
(i) “intermediate level” means a level between the village and district
levelsas specifiedunderclause (c) of article 243 tothe Constitution of India;
(j) “National Level Steering Committee” means a steering committee
constituted by theCentral Government undersub-section (1)of section14;
(k)“normative allocation” means the allocation of the fund made by the
Central Government to the State;
(l)“notification” means a notification published in the Official Gazette
and the term “notify”or“notified”, shall be construed accordingly;
(m)“prescribed” means prescribed by rules made under this Act;
(n)“Programme Officer” means an officer appointed under sub-section (1)
of section 18;
(o)“rural area” means any area in a State except those areas covered by
any urban local body or a Cantonment Board established or constituted under
any law for the time being in force;
(p)“Schedule” means Schedules appended to this Act;
(q)“Scheme” means the Scheme notified by the State Government under
sub-section (1)of section 3;
(r) “State” means a State specified in the First Schedule to the
Constitution and includes aUnion territory;
(s)“State Council” means the State Gramin Rozgar GuaranteeCouncil
constituted under sub-section (1)of section 13;
(t) “State Level Steering Committee” means a steering committee
constituted under sub-section (1)of section 15;
(u)“unskilled manual work” means any physical work which any adult
person is capable of doingwithout any skill orspecial training;
(v) “Viksit Bharat National Rural Infrastructure Stack” means the
consolidated aggregation comprising proposed works emerging from the
Viksit Gram Panchayat Plans aggregated at the District and State
levels, and aligned with the four thematic domains of works specified
in Schedule I;
(w)“ViksitGram Panchayat Plan” means a future-ready, convergence-
based local development plan aligned with the vision of Viksit Bharat @2047,
formulated by theGram Panchayat through a participatoryand evidence-based
process, and serving as the basis for identification and prioritisation of works
under this Act, as provided in sub-section (3) of section 4;
(x)“wage rate” means the wage rate referred to in section 10;
(y)“work” means any work undertaken or executed under the Scheme.
4 THE GAZETTE OF IND4IA EXTRAORDINARY [Part II—
CHAPTER II
IMPLEMENTATIONFRAMEWORK
State 3. (1) The State Government, shall within six months from the date of
Government commencement of this Act, by notification, make a Scheme consistent with the
implementation
provisions of this Act and the features provided therein.
framework for
Scheme.
(2) The Scheme made under sub-section (1) shall be implemented as a
Centrally Sponsored Scheme, under which the financial liability shall be shared
between the Central Government and the State Government in accordance with the
fund sharing pattern provided under sub-section (2) of section 22 of this Act,
including enhanced share of the Central Government in respect of the North-Eastern
States and Himalayan States, and the responsibility of the State Government to bear
any expenditure incurred in excess of its allocated share.
Planning 4. (1) All works undertaken under this Act shall be originated from the Viksit
framework in Gram Panchayat Plans prepared under sub-section (3), and consolidated at the
alignment with
Block, District and State levels and further aggregated into the Viksit Bharat
vision of Viksit
Bharat @2047. National Rural Infrastructure Stack, which shall comprise a comprehensive listing
of works aligned with National development priorities.
(2) The Viksit Bharat National Rural Infrastructure Stack shall encompass
four thematic focus domains, namely:—
(a)water security through water-related works;
(b)core rural infrastructure;
(c)livelihood-related infrastructure; and
(d)works for the mitigation of extreme weather events.
(3) Rural works planning under this Act shall be undertaken through Viksit
Gram Panchayat Plans, prepared by the Gram Panchayats and integrated with the
PM Gati Shakti National Master Plan, so as to enable spatially optimised
infrastructure development and strengthened inter-departmental convergence in
accordance with the provisions specified in Schedule I.
(4)For the purposes of sub-section (3), Gram Panchayats shall be categorised
into Category A, Category B and Category C, in accordance with the provisions
specified in Schedule I.
(5) The Central Government shall determine the State-wise normative
allocation for each financial year, based on objective parameters as may be
prescribed by the Central Government.
(6)Any expenditure incurred by a State in excess of its normative allocation
shall be borne by the State Government in such manner and by such procedure as
may be prescribed by the Central Government.
5. (1) Save as otherwise provided, the State Government shall, in such rural
Guarantee of
wage area in the State as may be notified by the Central Government, provide to every
employment to household whose adult members volunteer to do unskilled manual work, not less
rural households.
than one hundred and twenty-five days of guaranteed employment in a financial
year in accordance with the Scheme made under this Act.
(2)Every person who has done the work given to him under the Scheme shall
be entitled to receive wages at the wage rate for each day of work.
(3) Save as otherwise provided in this Act, the disbursement of daily wages
shall be made on a weekly basis or in any case not later than a fortnight after the
date on which such work was done.
Sec. 1] THE GAZETTE OF IND5IA EXTRAORDINARY 5
(4) The Central Government or the State Government, may within the limits
of economic capacity and development, make provisions for securing work to every
adult member of a household under the Scheme for any period beyond the period
guaranteed under sub-section (1), as may be expedient.
6. (1) Notwithstanding anything contained in this Act or rules made Facilitating
adequate
thereunder, and to facilitate adequate availability of agricultural labour during peak
agricultural
agricultural seasons, no work shall be commenced or executed under this Act, labour
during such peak seasons as may be notified under sub-section (2). availability
during peak
(2) The State Governments shall notify in advance, a period aggregating to agricultural
sixty days in a financial year, covering the peak agricultural seasons of sowing and seasons.
harvesting, during which works under this Act, shall not be undertaken.
(3) The State Government may issue distinct notifications for different areas
of the State, including districts, blocks or Gram Panchayats, based on agro-climatic
zones, local patterns of agricultural activities or other relevant factors, and every
such notification shall have a binding effect for the purposes of this Act.
(4) All authorities responsible for planning, sanctioning or executing works
under this Act shall ensure that all works are undertaken only outside the notified
peak agricultural seasons.
7.(1)Notwithstanding anything contained in this Act, the State Government Relaxations
during natural
may recommend to the Central Government, the need for special operational
calamities and
relaxations during natural calamities or other extraordinary circumstances for the extraordinary
purpose of ensuring timely response and support to affected households. circumstances.
(2)The Central Government may, upon consideration of the recommendations
received from the State Government, make specific relaxations, including temporary
expansion of permissible works, relaxed documentation norms, or enhanced wage
employment provisioning, as may be appropriate to address the situation.
(3)Notwithstanding anything in sub-section (2), the Central Government may
declare such relaxations as may be appropriate to address the situation.
CHAPTER III
Viksit Bharat—Guarantee for Rozgar and Ajeevika Mission (Gramin):
VB—G RAM G (विकवितभारत—जीरामजी)Scheme
8. (1) For the purposes of giving effect to the provisions of section 3, every Viksit Bharat—
State Government shall, make a Scheme, forproviding a guarantee of one hundred Guarantee for
Rozgar and
and twenty-five days of wage employment in a financial year to every rural
Ajeevika
household in the rural areas covered under the Scheme and whose adult members, Mission
by application, volunteer to do unskilled manual work subject to the conditions (Gramin):
VB—G RAM G
under this Act.
(विकवित
(2)The State Government shall publish a summary of the Scheme made under भारत—जीराम
जी)Scheme.
sub-section (1) in at least two local newspapers, one of which shall be in a vernacular
language circulating in the area or areas to which the Scheme applies, and shall also
make such summary publicly available through electronic means, including the
official website of the State Government or any designated digital platform.
(3)The Scheme made under sub-section (1) shall conform to and provide for
theminimum features specified in Schedule I.
9. (1) The State Government may, without prejudice to the conditions Conditions for
providing
specified in Schedule II, specify in the Scheme the conditions for providing
guaranteed
guaranteed employment under this Act.
employment.
(2) The persons employed under the Scheme made under this Act, shall be
entitled to such facilities not less than the minimum facilities specified in
Schedule II.
6 THE GAZETTE OF IND6IA EXTRAORDINARY [Part II—
Wage rate. 10. The Central Government may, by notification, specify the wage rate for
the purposes of this Act, which shall apply to all unskilled manual work provided
under the Scheme:
Provided that different wage rates may be notified by the Central Government
for different areas:
Provided further that the wage rate so notified shall not be less than the
prevailing wage rate as notified under section 6 of the Mahatma Gandhi National
42 of 2005.
Rural Employment Guarantee Act, 2005:
Provided also that until a wage rate is notified by the Central Government
under this section, the wage rates notified under section 6 of the Mahatma Gandhi
National Rural Employment Guarantee Act, 2005, shall continue to apply in the 42 of 2005.
areas covered by this Act.
Payment of 11.(1) If an applicant for employment under the Scheme is not provided such
unemployment employment within fifteen days of receipt of his application seeking employment or
allowance.
from the date on which the employmenthas been sought in the case of an advance
application, whichever is later, he shall be entitled to a daily unemployment
allowance in accordance with the provision of this section.
(2)Subject to such terms and conditions of eligibility as may be prescribed by
the State Government and subject to the provisions of this Act and the Scheme and
the economic capacity of the State Government, the unemployment allowance
payable under sub-section (1) shall be paid to the applicants of a household,
subject to the guarantee provided under this Act, at such rate as may be
specified by the State Government, by notification, in consultation with the
State Council:
Provided that no such rate shall be less than one-fourth of the notified wage
rate for the first thirty days during the financial year and not less than one-half of
the wage rate for the remaining period of the financial year.
(3)The liability of the State Government to pay unemployment allowance to
a household during any financial yearshall cease as soon as—
(a) the applicant is directed by the Gram Panchayat or Programme
Officer to report forwork either by himself or depute at least one adult member
of the household; or
(b)theperiodfor which employment issought,comes to an end and no
member ofthe householdofthe applicant had turned up foremployment; or
(c)the adult members of the household of the applicant have received in
total at least one hundred and twenty-five days of work within the financial
year; or
(d) the household of the applicant has earned as much from the wages
andunemployment allowance taken together which is equal to the wages for
one hundred and twenty-five days of work during the financial year.
(4) The unemployment allowance payable to the household of an applicant
jointly, shall be sanctioned and disbursed by the Programme Officer or such local
authority (including the Panchayat at the District, intermediate or village level) as
the State Government may, by notification, authorise in this behalf.
(5) Every payment of unemployment allowance under sub-section (1), shall
be made or offered not later than fifteen days from the date on which it became due
for payment.
(6) The State Government may prescribe the procedure for the payment of
unemployment allowance under this Act.
Sec. 1] THE GAZETTE OF IND7IA EXTRAORDINARY 7
CHAPTER IV
IMPLEMENTING ANDMONITORINGAUTHORITIES
12. (1) With effect from such date as the Central Government may, by Central Gramin
notification, appoint, there shall be constituted a Council to be known as the Rozgar
Guarantee
Central Gramin Rozgar Guarantee Council to discharge the functions and perform
Council.
the duties assigned to it under this Act.
(2) The Central Council shall consist of Chairperson, representatives of
Central Government and State Governments, not more than fifteen non-official
members representing Panchayati Raj Institutions, organisations of workers and
weaker section of the society and a Member-Secretary not below the rank of Joint
Secretary to the Government of India.
(3) The composition, terms and conditions of appointment, tenure, and
meetingproceduresshallbesuch,asmaybeprescribedbytheCentralGovernment.
(4) The Central Council shall perform such functions, duties and advisory
roles relating to evaluation, monitoring, implementation support and reporting
under this Act, as may be assigned to it by the Central Government, and the
detailed functions, responsibilities and modalities of functioning shall be such, as
may be prescribed by the Central Government.
13. (1) For the purposes of regular monitoring and reviewing the State Gramin
implementation of the provisions of this Act at the State level, every State Rozgar
Guarantee
Government shall, by notification, constitute a State Council to be known as the
Council.
State Gramin Rozgar Guarantee Council, consisting of a Chairperson and such
number of official members as may be determined by the State Government and
not more than fifteen non-official members nominated by the State Government
from Panchayati Raj Institutions, organisations of workers and weaker section of
the society:
Provided that not less than one-third of the non-official members nominated
underthis sub-section shallbe women:
Provided further that not less than one-third of the non-official members shall
belong to the Scheduled Castes, the Scheduled Tribes, the Other Backward Classes
and Minorities.
(2) The terms and conditions subject to which the Chairperson and
members of the State Council may be appointed and the time, place and
procedure of the meetings (including the quorum at such meetings) of the
Council shall be such, as may be prescribed by the State Government.
(3)The duties and functions of the State Council shall include—
(a)advisingtheStateGovernmentonallmattersconcerningtheScheme
and its implementation in the State;
(b) reviewing the monitoring and redressal mechanisms from time to
time and recommending improvements;
(c) monitoring the implementation of this Act and the Scheme in the
State and coordinating such implementation with the Central Council;
(d)preparing the annual report to belaid before the State Legislature by
the State Government;
(e) any other duty or function as may be assigned to it by the Central
Councilorthe State Government.
(4)The StateCouncilshall have the power to undertakean evaluation of the
Scheme operating in the State and for that purpose to collect or cause to be collected
statisticspertainingtotheruraleconomyandtheimplementation of the Scheme and
Programmes in the State.
8 THE GAZETTE OF IND8IA EXTRAORDINARY [Part II—
National Level 14. (1) The Central Government shall, by notification, constitute a National
Steering Level Steering Committee to recommend decisions relating to normative allocations
Committee.
to States and to advise on matters requiring inter-ministerial consultation, including
convergence framework and to provide high level oversight for the effective
implementation of this Act.
(2) The National Level Steering Committee shall consist of such senior
officials of the Central Government and such other members as may be determined
by the Central Government, and the terms and conditions of their appointment shall
be such, as may be prescribed by the Central Government.
(3)The National Level Steering Committee shall—
(a)recommend decisions relating to normative allocations to States;
(b) recommend policy measures on matters requiring inter-ministerial
consultation, including convergence initiatives and frameworks;
(c)provide high level strategic oversight for effective implementation of
this Act;
(d) review performance of States and recommend corrective or
supportive measures;
(e)facilitate coordination among the Ministries and Departments of the
Central Government and between the Central Government and State
Governments for effective convergence and implementation of the provisions
of this Act;
(f) advise on standards, guidelines, monitoring systems, digital and
geospatial public infrastructure necessary for implementation of the
provisions of this Act; and
(g)perform such other functions as may be assigned to it by the Central
Government.
State Level 15. (1) The State Government shall, constitute a State Level Steering
Steering Committee to provide operational guidance, coordination, and monitor the
Committee.
implementation of the Scheme.
(2) The State Level Steering Committee constituted under sub-section (1),
shallbe presided over by the Chief Secretary of the State or by an officer not below
the rank of Additional Chief Secretary nominated by the State Government and shall
comprise of the following members, namely:—
(a)Principal Secretary or Secretary of the respective Department;
(b)the Director or Commissioner (in-charge of the Scheme);
(c) Principal Secretaries or Secretaries of relevant Departments of the
State Government;
(d)such number of subject-matter experts, as may be determined by the
State Government;
(e)representatives of technical or research institutions; and
(f) one member nominated by the Department of Rural Development,
Ministry of Rural Development, Government of India.
(3)The State Level Steering Committee shall—
(a)oversee State wide planning and convergence with other
programmes;
(b) review of district performance and ensure timely preparation of the
aggregate State plan;
Sec. 1] THE GAZETTE OF IND9IA EXTRAORDINARY 9
(c) coordinate with the National Level Steering Committee and
implement directions issued therefrom;
(d) support digital systems, monitoring arrangements, and process
improvements at the State level; and
(e) perform such other functions as may be assigned to it by the State
Government.
16.(1) The Panchayats at the district, intermediate and village levels shall be Principal
theprincipal authorities for planning,implementationandmonitoringof theScheme authorities for
planning and
made under this Act.
implementation
of Scheme.
(2) The Panchayat at the district level, shall oversee and coordinate
implementation of the Scheme in the district, including finalisation and approval of
the aggregate district level plan, supervision and monitoring of works, ensuring
convergence, and perform such other functions as may be assigned to it by the State
Government.
(3) The Panchayat at the intermediate level, shall prepare and finalise the
aggregate Block level plan, support Gram Panchayats in planning and
implementation, supervise works at Gram Panchayat and Block levels, and
facilitate convergence with line departments.
(4) The Gram Panchayat shall register households, receive and process
applications for work, prepare the Viksit Gram Panchayat Plans, execute the works
assigned to it, maintain such records as may be specified by the State Government,
and discharge such other responsibilities as may be entrusted to it under the Scheme.
17. (1) The District Collector or any officer of equivalent rank as the State District
Government may decide, shall be designated as the District Programme Coordinator Programme
Coordinator.
for the implementation of the Scheme in the district.
(2) The District Programme Coordinator shall be responsible for the
implementation of the Scheme in the district in accordance with the provisions of
this Act and the rules made thereunder.
(3)Thefunctionsof theDistrict ProgrammeCoordinator shall beasfollows,
namely:—
(a) the District Programme Coordinator shall be responsible for the
consolidation and finalisation of the district aggregate plan and shall oversee
convergence, implementation and monitoring of the Scheme at the district
level in accordance with the provisions of this Act;
(b) the District Programme Coordinator shall ensure compliance with
the provisions of this Act and with the directions and guidelines issued by the
Central Government and the State Government, and shall accord such
administrative sanctions and clearances as may be required for the timely and
effective implementation of the Scheme, including those relating to digital,
geospatial and monitoring systems;
(c)the District Programme Coordinator shall coordinate with Programme
Officers, and shall review, monitor and supervise their performance using the
monitoring framework, management information system and accountability
mechanisms established under this Act and the Scheme;
(d) the District Programme Coordinator shall conduct periodic
inspections of works undertaken under the Scheme, ensure adherence to
quality and productivity standards, and shall redress the grievances of
applicants through digital public infrastructure and designated grievance
redressal systems in such manner as may be prescribed by the Central
Government.
10 THE GAZETTE OF IN1D0IA EXTRAORDINARY [Part II—
(4)The Programme Officer and all other officers of the State Government and
local authorities and bodies functioning within the district, shall assist the District
Programme Coordinator in carrying out his functions under this Act.
(5)The District Programme Coordinator, shall prepare an aggregate plan for
the district under his jurisdiction by consolidating the approved Viksit Gram
Panchayat Plans and aggregated Block Plans and the proposals received from the
ZilaPanchayats.
18. (1) At every Panchayat at intermediate level, the State Government shall
Programme
Officer. appoint a person who is not below the rank of Block Development Officer with such
qualifications and experience as may be determined by the State Government as
Programme Officer at the panchayat at intermediate level.
(2)TheProgrammeOfficer shall assist thePanchayat at theintermediatelevel
in discharging its functions under this Act and the Scheme made thereunder.
(3)The Programme Officer shall be responsible for matching the demand for
employment with the employment opportunities arising from works in the area
under his jurisdiction.
(4) The Programme Officer shall prepare an aggregate plan for the Block
under his jurisdiction by consolidating the approved Viksit Gram Panchayat Plans
and the proposals received from intermediate panchayats.
(5)Withoutprejudice to the generality of sub-section (2),the functions of the
ProgrammeOfficer shall include—
(a) monitoring all works and projects undertaken by the Gram
Panchayats and other implementing agencies within the Block, ensuring
alignment with the Viksit Gram Panchayat Plans;
(b) sanctioning and ensuring payment of unemployment allowance to
eligible households in accordance with the provisions of this Act;
(c)ensuring prompt and fair payment of wages to all labourers employed
under the Scheme within the Block, including through digital and biometric
authenticated payment systems, as may be specified by the Central
Government;
(d)ensuring that regular social audits of all works within the jurisdiction
of each Gram Panchayat are conducted by the Gram Sabha, and that timely
and appropriate action is taken on objections and findings arising from
such audits;
(e) dealing promptly with all complaints and grievances relating to the
implementation of the Scheme within the Block, through the grievance
redressal mechanisms established under sub-section (1) of section 25 of
this Act;
(f) ensuring the geo-tagging, digital recording, and management
information system reporting of all works undertaken within the Block, and
compliance with monitoring, productivity, and transparency framework,
specified by the Central Government under this Act;
(g) facilitating inter-departmental convergence at the Block level to
support saturation-driven planning and the execution of works under the
Scheme; and
(h) any other function as may be assigned to him by the District
Programme Coordinator and the State Government under this Act.
(6) The Programme Officer shall perform his function under the direction,
control and superintendence of the District Programme Coordinator.
Sec. 1] THE GAZETTE OF IN1D1IA EXTRAORDINARY 11
19.The Gram Panchayat shall be responsible for— Responsibilities
of Gram
(a)registrationofhouseholdsandissuanceofGraminRozgarGuarantee Panchayats.
Cards;
(b) receiving work applications and maintaining records of Gramin
Rozgar Guarantee Cards;
(c)preparing the Viksit Gram Panchayat Plans;
(d)every Gram Panchayat shall, after considering the recommendations
of the Gram Sabha and the Ward Sabhas, keeping in view of the demand for
works, prepare a Viksit Gram Panchayat Plan on saturation basis;
(e) the Programme Officer shall allocate at least fifty per cent. of the
works in terms of its cost under the Scheme to be implemented through the
Gram Panchayats;
(f)the Programme Officer shall supply each Gram Panchayat with—
(i)the muster rolls for the works sanctioned to be executed by it;
(ii) a list of employment opportunities available elsewhere to the
residents of the Gram Panchayat;
(g)the Gram Panchayat shall allocate employment opportunities among
the applicants and ask them to report for work;
(h) the works taken up by a Gram Panchayat under the Scheme, shall
meet the required technical standards and measurements;
(i)executing works allotted to it by the Programme Officer;and
(j)a Gram Panchayat may take up any work under the Scheme from
Viksit Gram Panchayat Plan within the area of the Gram Panchayat, as may
be sanctioned by the Programme Officer.
20.(1) The Gram Sabha, shall monitor and review the execution of all works Social audit of
works by Gram
undertaken under the Scheme within the jurisdiction of the Gram Panchayat, in
Sabha.
accordance with theprovisions of this Act.
(2)The Gram Sabha shall conduct regular social audits of all works taken up
under the Scheme within the Gram Panchayat, in such manner as may be prescribed
by the Central Government.
(3) The Gram Panchayat shall make available to the Gram Sabha all records
and documents required for conduct of the social audit, including muster rolls, bills,
vouchers, measurement books, sanction orders, digital records, geo-tagged
photographs, and all other connected books of account and papers, whether
maintained in physical or electronic form.
21. The State Government, shall provide the necessary staff and technical Responsibilities
of State
support to the District Programme Coordinator and the Programme Officer as may
Government in
be necessary for the effective implementation of the Scheme. implementing
Scheme.
CHAPTERV
NATUREOFTHESCHEMEANDFUNDSHARINGPATTERN
22. (1) The Scheme implemented under this Act shall be a Centrally Nature of
Scheme and
Sponsored Scheme.
fund sharing
pattern.
(2)For the purposes of this Act, the fund sharing pattern between the Central
Government and the State Governments shall be 90:10 for the North Eastern States,
Himalayan States and Union territory (Uttarakhand, Himachal Pradesh and Jammu
and Kashmir) and 60:40 for all other States and Union territories with legislature.
12 THE GAZETTE OF IN1D2IA EXTRAORDINARY [Part II—
(3)For the Union territories without legislature, the Central Government shall
bear the entire expenses of the Scheme in the manner as may be prescribed by the
Central Government.
(4) The Central Government shall determine the State-wise normative
allocation for each financial year, based on objective parameters as may be
prescribed by the Central Government.
(5) Any expenditure incurred by a State in excess of its normative allocation
shall be borne by the State Government in such manner and procedure as may be
prescribed by the Central Government.
(6) In accordance with the State-wise normative allocation determined under
this Act, the share of the Central Government shall include expenditure towards—
(a) payment of wages for unskilled, semi-skilled and skilled labour
employed under the Scheme;
(b) the material component of works, subject to the provisions in
Schedule I;
(c) such administrative expenses as may be specified by the Central
Government, including salary and allowances of Programme Officers and
supporting staff, administrative expenses of the Central Council, facilities
required under Schedule II, and such other items as may be prescribed by the
Central Government.
(7)In accordance with the State-wise normative allocation determined under
this Act, the share of the State Government shallincludeexpenditure towards—
(a) payment of wages for unskilled, semi-skilled and skilled labour
employed under the Scheme;
(b) the material component of works, subject to the provisions in
Schedule I;
(c) such administrative expenses as may be specified by the Central
Government, including salary and allowances of Programme Officers and
supporting staff, administrative expenses of the State Council, facilities
required under Schedule II, and such other items as may be prescribed by the
Central Government.
(8)The State Government, shall bear the expenditure towards unemployment
allowance and delay compensation as may be prescribed by the State Government.
CHAPTER VI
TRANSPARENCY AND ACCOUNTABILITY
Transparency 23.(1) The District Programme Coordinator and all implementing agencies in the
and district shall be responsible for the proper utilisation and management of the funds
accountability.
placed at their disposal for the purpose of implementing the Scheme under this Act.
(2) The manner of maintaining proper books and accounts relating to the
employment of labourers and the expenditure incurred in connection with the
implementation of the provisions of this Act, shall be such, as may be prescribed by
the State Government.
(3)The State Government may determine the arrangements to be made for the
proper execution of works under the Scheme and to ensure transparency and
accountability at all levels in the implementation of the Schemes.
(4) All payments of wages and unemployment allowances shall be made
directly to the person concerned in such manner, as may be prescribed by the Central
Government.
Sec. 1] THE GAZETTE OF IN1D3IA EXTRAORDINARY 13
(5) If any dispute or complaint arises concerning the implementation of the
Scheme by the Gram Panchayat, the matter shall be referred to the Programme Officer.
(6)The Programme Officer shall enter every dispute or complaint in a complaint
register maintained by him and shall dispose of such dispute or complaint within a
period of seven days of its receipt; and where the matter relates to any other authority,
it shall be forwarded to such authority under intimation to the complainant.
24. Without prejudice to theforegoing provisions, transparency and accountability Technology-
in the implementation of the provisions of this Act, shall be ensured through— enabled
transparency and
(a)biometric authentication of workers, functionaries, and transactions, public
accountability.
in such manner, as may be specified by the CentralGovernment;
(b) geospatial technology-enabled planning, including geo-referencing,
satellite imagery, digital mapping of works, and other approved spatial
technologies, as may be specified by the Central Government;
(c) mobile application-based and dashboard-based monitoring systems
providing real-time visibility of demand, works, workforce deployment,
payments, progress and other indicators, as may be specified by the Central
Government;
(d) weekly public disclosure systems, including digital and physical
disclosure of key metrics, muster rolls, payments, sanctions, inspections and
grievances, as may be specified by the Central Government;
(e) strengthening of the social audit mechanism, and the adoption of
such other technology-enabled systems, as may be prescribed by the
Central Government.
25. (1) The State Government shall, determine a time-bound and multi-tier Grievance
grievance redressal mechanism at the Block level and the District level for dealing redressal
mechanism.
with any complaint made by any person in respect of implementation of the
Scheme and lay down the procedure for disposal of such complaints in such
manner, as may be prescribed by the Central Government.
(2) These mechanisms shall address grievances related to applicants, which
include,—
(a) failure of the Gram Panchayat or Programme Officer to provide
employment within the stipulated period referred to in sub-section (1) of
section 11;
(b)non-payment or delayed payment of wages;
(c)non-payment of unemployment allowance;
(d)lack of specified worksite facilities as specified in Schedule II;
(e) discrimination, harassment, or violation of worker rights, including
thoseof women and vulnerable groups.
26.(1)TheCentralGovernment may by rules provide for in consultation with Audit of
the Comptroller and Auditor-General of India, appropriate arrangements for accounts.
auditsofthe accounts of theSchemesatalllevels.
(2)Theaccounts of the Scheme shall bemaintained in such form and in such
manner, as maybe prescribed by the State Government.
CHAPTER VII
MISCELLANEOUS
27.Whoever contravenes anyprovisionof thisAct,shall beliabletopaythe Penalties for
penalty which may extend to ten thousand rupees. contravention.
14 THE GAZETTE OF IN1D4IA EXTRAORDINARY [Part II—
Power to 28. (1) The Central Government may, by notification, direct that the powers
delegate. exercisable by it (excluding the power to make rules) may, in such circumstances
and subject to such conditions and limitations, be exercisable also by the State
Government or such officer subordinate to the Central Government or the State
Government as it may specify in such notification.
(2) The State Government may, by notification, direct that the powers
exercisable by it (excluding the power to make rules and Schemes) may, in such
circumstances and subject to such conditions and limitations, be exercisable also by
such officer subordinate to it as it may specify in such notification.
Power of Central
29.(1) The Central Government may give such directions as it may consider
Government to necessary to the State Government for the effective implementation of the
give directions. provisions of this Act.
(2) Without prejudice to the provisions of sub-section (1), the Central
Government may, on receipt of any complaint regarding any issue or improper
utilisation of funds granted under this Act in respect of any Scheme, if prima facie
satisfied that there is a case, cause an investigation into the complaint made by any
agency designated by it and if necessary, order stoppage of release of funds to the
Scheme and institute appropriate remedial measures for its proper implementation
within a reasonable period of time.
Act to have 30.The provisions of this Act or the Scheme made thereunder shall have effect
overriding notwithstanding anything inconsistent therewith contained in any other law for the
effect.
time being in force or in any instrument having effect by virtue of such law:
Provided that where a State Act exists or is enacted to provide employment
guarantee for unskilled manual work to rural households consistent with the
provisions of this Act under which the guarantee of the households is not less than
and the conditions of employment are not inferior to what is guaranteed under this
Act, the State Government shall have the option of implementing its own enactment:
Provided further that in such cases the financial assistance shall be paid to the
concerned State Government in such manner as shall be determined by the Central
Government, which shall not exceed what the State would have been entitled to
receive under this Act had a Scheme made under this Act had to be implemented.
Power to amend 31.(1)If the Central Government is satisfied that it is necessary or expedient
Schedules. to do so, it may, by notification, amend Schedule.
(2) Every notification issued under sub-section (1) shall be laid before each
HouseofParliament.
Protection of 32.No suit, prosecution or other legal proceedings shall lie against the District
action taken in Programme Coordinator, Programme Officer or any other person who is, or who is
good faith.
deemed to be, a public servant within the meaning of clause (28) of section 2 of the
Bharatiya Nyaya Sanhita, 2023 in respect of anything which is in good faith done 45 of 2023.
or intended to be done under this Act or the rules or Schemes made thereunder.
Power of Central 33. (1) The Central Government shall, by notification, and subject to the
Government to conditionof previouspublication,makerules tocarryout theprovisionsof thisAct.
make rules.
(2) In particular, and without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing
power,such rules may provide for alloranyofthe following matters, namely:—
(a) State-wise normative allocation for each financial year, based on
objective parameters under sub-section (5) of section 4;
(b) manner and procedure to bear the excess expenditure and its
parameters under sub-section (6) of section 4;
(c) the composition, terms and conditions of appointment, tenure and
procedure of meeting under sub-section (3) of section 12;
15
Sec. 1] THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 15
(d) the detailed functions, responsibilities and modalities under
sub-section (4) of section 12;
(e) terms and conditions of appointment of officials of National Level
Steering Committee under sub-section (2) of section 14;
(f)manner to redress thegrievance under clause (d) of sub-section (3) of
section 17;
(g) manner of conducting social audit by Gram Sabha under
sub-section (2) of section 20;
(h) manner to bear the expenses of Scheme under sub-section (3) of
section 22;
(i)objective parameters to determine the State-wise normative allocation
under sub-section (4) of section 22;
(j) manner and procedure to bear the excess expenditure under
sub-section (5) of section 22;
(k)other items under clause (c) of sub-section (6) of section 22;
(l)other items under clause (c) of sub-section (7) of section 22;
(m)manner of payments of wages and unemployment allowances under
sub-section (4) of section 23;
(n) social audit mechanism, and the adoption of such other
technology-enabled systems under clause (e) of section 24;
(o)manner to lay down the procedure for disposal of complaints under
sub-section (1) of section 25;
(p)the manner of transfer and vesting under sub-section (5) of section 37;
(q)any other matter which is to be, or prescribed or in respect of which
provision is to be made by rules for carrying out the provisions of this Act.
34.(1) The State Government may, by notification, and subject to the condition Power of State
of previous publication, and consistent with the provisions of this Act and the rules Government to
make rules.
made by the Central Government, make rules to carry out the provisions of this Act.
(2)In particular, and without prejudice of the foregoing power, such rules may
provide for all or any of the following matters, namely:—
(a)terms and conditions of eligibility under sub-section (2) of section 11;
(b) the procedure for payment of unemployment allowance under
sub-section (6) of section 11;
(c)terms, conditions, time, place and procedure of meeting and quorum
under sub-section (2) of section 13;
(d) expenditure towards unemployment allowance and delay
compensation under sub-section (8) of section 22;
(e) manner of maintaining proper books and accounts under
sub-section (2) of section 23;
(f) form and manner to maintain the accounts of the Scheme under
sub-section (2)of section 26;
(g) any other matter which is to be, or prescribed or in respect of which
provision is to be made by the State Government, for carrying out the
provisions of this Act.
35. (1) Every rule made by the Central Government under this Act shall be Laying of rules
laid, as soon as may be after it is made, before each House of Parliament, while it is and Schemes.
in session, for a total period of thirty days which may be comprised in one session
or in two or more successive sessions, and if, before the expiry of the session
immediately following the session or the successive sessions aforesaid, both Houses
agree in making any modification in the rule or both Houses agree that the rule
should not be made, the rule shall thereafter have effect only in such modified form
or be of no effect, as the case may be; so, however, that any such modification or
annulment shall be without prejudice to the validity of anything previously done
under that rule.
16 THE GAZETTE OF IN1D6IA EXTRAORDINARY [Part II—
(2)Every rule or Scheme made by the State Government under this Act shall,
as soon as may be after it is made, be laid before each House of the State Legislature
where there are two Houses, and where there is one House of the State Legislature,
before that House.
Power to remove 36.(1) If any difficulty arises in giving effect to the provisions of this Act, the
difficulties. Central Government may, by order published in the Official Gazette, make such
provisions, not inconsistent with the provisions of this Act, as appear to it to be
necessary or expedient for removing the difficulty.
(2) No order shall be made under this section after the expiry of three years
from the commencement of this Act.
(3) Every order made under this section shall, as soon as may be after it is
made, be laid before each House of Parliament.
Repeal, savings 37. (1) Save as provided in section 10, on and from such date as the Central
and transitional Government may by notification appoint in thisbehalf (hereinafter referred to as the
provisions.
appointed date), the Mahatma Gandhi National Rural Employment Guarantee
Act, 2005, together with all rules, notifications, Schemes, orders and guidelines 42 of 2005.
made thereunder, shall stand repealed.
(2)Notwithstanding such repeal, anything duly done or any action taken under
the repealed Act, including any notification issued, scheme sanctioned, employment
generated, muster roll prepared, wage liability accrued, or proceeding initiated,
shall, in so far as it is not inconsistent with the provisions of this Act, be deemed to
have been done, taken, issued, sanctioned, accrued or incurred under the
corresponding provisions of this Act, as if this Act had been in force at all
material times.
(3) All appointments, engagements, authorisations, approvals and
administrative arrangements made under the repealed Act and continuing
immediately before the appointed date shall, unless inconsistent with the provisions
of this Act, continue to be valid and in force until they are altered, superseded or
withdrawn under this Act.
(4) All inquiries, investigations, audits and legal proceedings pending
immediately before the appointed date shall be continued, heard and disposed of as
if the repealed Act had not been repealed, and such proceedings shall not abate by
reason only of such repeal.
(5) All assets, liabilities, records, funds and obligations arising under, or
relating to, the repealed Act shall stand transferred to and vest in the authorities
constituted under this Act and shall be dealt with in such manner as may be
prescribed by the Central Government.
Sec. 1] THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 17
SCHEDULE I
[Seesection 8(3)]
Minimumfeatures of ViksitBharat—Guarantee forRozgarandAjeevika Mission
(Gramin):VB—GRAMG(विकवितभारत—जीरामजी)Scheme
1.The Scheme notified under section 8 of the Act by all States shall be called
the “Viksit Bharat—Guarantee for Rozgar and Ajeevika Mission (Gramin):
VB—G RAM G (विकवितभारत—जीरामजी)Scheme” and all documents pertaining
to the said Scheme shall have a mention of the Viksit Bharat—Guarantee for Rozgar
and Ajeevika Mission (Gramin): VB—G RAM G (विकवित भारत—जी राम जी)
Act, 2025.
2. All Scheme documents pertaining to the said Scheme shall have a mention
of the Viksit Bharat—Guarantee for Rozgar and Ajeevika Mission (Gramin):
VB—G RAM G (विकिितभारत—जीरामजी)Act, 2025.
3. The core objectives of the Scheme shall be as follows:—(a) The primary
objective of this Act is to align the rural development framework with the national
vision of Viksit Bharat @2047 by providing an enhanced statutory wage-
employment guarantee of one hundred and twenty-five days in each financial year
to such rural households whose adult members volunteer to undertake unskilled
manual work, thereby enabling them to participate more effectively in the expanded
livelihood security framework.
(b) To focus on empowerment, growth, convergence and saturation through
public works aggregating into forming Viksit Bharat National Rural Infrastructure
Stack, with a thematic focus on water security through water-related works, core
rural infrastructure, livelihood-related infrastructure and special works to mitigate
extreme weather events.
(c) To facilitate adequate farm-labour availability during peak agricultural
seasons, and, in viewof thewage-employmentguaranteefor the ruralworkforce.
(d) To institutionalise convergence, saturation-driven planning and whole of
government delivery through Viksit Gram Panchayat Plans, integrated with the PM
Gati Shakti to address the varying needs ofGram Panchayats, powered by geospatial
systems, digital public infrastructure, district and State planning mechanisms, with
such plans aggregated at the Block, District, State and National levels.
(e)To modernise governance, accountability and citizen engagement through a
comprehensivedigitalecosystem,includingbiometricauthenticationatvariouslevels,
global positioning system or mobile based worksite monitoring, real time
management information system dashboards, proactive public disclosures and the use
of Artificial Intelligence for planning, audits and fraud risk mitigation.
4. Works under the Scheme—(1) Focus of the Scheme—Classification of
Works: The Scheme shall focus on the following categories of works, as identified
in the Viksit Gram Panchayat Plans and aggregated into the Viksit Bharat National
Rural Infrastructure Stack.
(2) For the purposes of section 4 of the Act, the works to be taken up under
the Scheme, shall fall under the following Categories, together with their thematic
focus and intended outcomes, namely:—
(a)Category I—Water-Related Works (forWaterSecurity)—
17
18 THE GAZETTE OF IN1D8IA EXTRAORDINARY [Part II—
(A) The focus shall include conservation, irrigation, groundwater
recharge, source sustainability, rejuvenation of water bodies, watershed
development and afforestation and the Illustrative works include—
(i)construction of canals, flood or diversion channels, check
dams, gully plugs and underground dykes;
(ii)construction or rejuvenation of ponds, percolation tanks,
recharge pits, recharge shafts, injection wells and associated water
harvesting structures;
(iii)irrigation open wells, micro-irrigation channels and field
water distribution systems;
(iv)reclamation of community waterlogged land;
(v) afforestation and plantation works linked with soil and
moisture conservation; and
(vi) rooftop rainwater harvesting and other decentralised
recharge systems.
(B)Intended Outcomes—Strengthening of water security through
integrated water resource management, recharge and conservation for
long-term climate resilience.
(b)Category II—Core Rural Infrastructure—
(A)Thematic focus shall include core civic, social, governance and
service-delivery infrastructure relating to education, health, drinking
water, sanitation, connectivity, renewable energy and community
services and the Illustrative works include—
(i)construction or upgradation of rural roads, culverts, cross-
drainage structures and village connectivity facilities;
(ii) construction of Gram Panchayat Bhawans, Anganwadi
centres, rural libraries and other public buildings;
(iii) construction of school infrastructure, including kitchen
sheds, additional classrooms, laboratories, compound walls and
playgrounds;
(iv)crematoria and community infrastructure;
(v) solid and liquid waste management assets, including
stabilising ponds, community sanitary complexes, and waste
segregation and collection centres;
(vi)installation of solar lighting systems and other renewable
ruralenergy infrastructure;
(vii)villageparking areas,transport sheds andother common
rural amenities;
(viii) rural housing works permissible under the schemes of
the Central Government, including those permitted under the
Pradhan Mantri Awas Yojana—Gramin;and
(ix) repair and maintenance of works created under the Jal
Jeevan Mission for ensuringwater supply.
(B)IntendedOutcome—Creationof foundational civicandsocial
infrastructure ensuring basic amenities, improved service access and
enhanced quality of life in rural areas.
(c)Category III—Livelihood-related Infrastructure—
Sec. 1] THE GAZETTE OF IN1D9IA EXTRAORDINARY 19
(A) Thematic focus shall include productive assets and facilities
that enhance rural livelihoods through agriculture, livestock, fisheries,
value addition, skilling and enterprise development and the Illustrative
works include—
(i) construction of training-cum-skill development centres
and work sheds for livelihood activities;
(ii) rural haats or weekly markets and other market
infrastructure;
(iii) food grain storage buildings, agricultural produce
storage structures, cold storage units and other agri-value chain
infrastructure;
(iv) buildings for Self Help Groups and federation-level
institutions;
(v)compost structures, including vermicompost and NADEP
units;
(vi) development of silvipasture grasslands, dairy
infrastructure and shelters for cattle, goats, pigs, poultry and other
livestock;
(vii) fisheries-related infrastructure, including fish drying
yards;
(viii)raising of nurseries and production of building material;
and
(ix) Integrated projects promoting circular and cyclical
economy models, as may be approved by the Central Government.
(B)Intended Outcome—Strengthening of sustainable livelihoods,
value addition, enterprise development and self-reliant rural economies.
(d) Category IV—Special works to mitigate Extreme Weather Events
and Disaster Preparedness—
(A) Thematic focus shall include disaster risk reduction,
climate adaptation, and protection of rural communities and assets
from floods, cyclones, storms, droughts, landslides, forest fires and
other extreme weather events and the Illustrative works include—
(i) construction of cyclone shelters, flood shelters and
multipurpose disaster resilient structures;
(ii) construction of diversion channels, embankments
and other disaster-mitigation works;
(iii) stabilising ponds and water structures for flood
management;
(iv) post-disaster rehabilitation, restoration and repair
of rural roads and community assets;
(v)windbreak and shelterbelt plantations; and
(vi) forest fire management works, including fire
breaks, fuel buffer zones and allied measures.
20 THE GAZETTE OF IN2D0IA EXTRAORDINARY [Part II—
(B) Intended Outcome—Creation of climate-resilient
villages capable of withstanding extreme weather conditions.
(3)Any other public work which may be notified by the Central Government.
(4)Maintenance of rural public assets created under the Act.
(5) Works for individual beneficiaries, including but not limited to housing-
related works under the Pradhan Mantri Awaas Yojana—Gramin, sanitation-related
works, and other beneficiary-oriented developmental works undertaken under
various schemes of the Central Government from time to time and expressly notified
for inclusion under the Scheme, may also be taken up. The eligibility of such
beneficiaries shall be as notified by the Central Government, aligned with the
eligibility criteria specified under the respective Central Government schemes, with
all such works conforming to the norms, standards and guidelines issued by the
Central Government.
(6)Without prejudice to the generality of the above, works creating individual
assets as notified by the Central Government shall be prioritised on land or
homestead owned by households belonging to—
(a)the Scheduled Castes;
(b)the Scheduled Tribes;
(c)nomadic tribes;
(d)denotified tribes;
(e) economically weaker sections of the society as identified based on
criteria notified by the Central Government;
(f)women-headed households;
(g)households headed by persons with disabilities;
(h)beneficiariesof land reforms;
(i)beneficiariesunderthePradhan MantriAwaas Yojana—Gramin
(PMAY-G);and
(j) beneficiaries under the Scheduled Tribes and Other
Traditional Forest Dwellers (Recognition of Forest Rights) Act, 2006
(2 of 2007), and
after exhausting the eligible beneficiaries under the above categories, works may be
taken up on the lands of small or marginal farmers as identified on the basis of
criteria notified by the Central Government, subject to such conditions as may be
notified by the Central Government, including the requirement that such households
possess a valid job card and have at least one adult member willing to work on the
project undertaken on their land or homestead.
5. Participatory Planning under the Scheme:—(1) All Central, State or local
schemes, as may be notified by the Central Government for the purpose of
convergence and saturation-based planning, shall be brought under a unified
planning process anchored in the Viksit Gram Panchayat Plans.
(2) There shall be a systematic and participatory planning exercise
undertaken at each tier of the Panchayati Raj system in accordance with
the specified methodology. The Viksit Gram Panchayat Plans shall be
prepared by the Gram Panchayats using GIS-based tools, PM Gati Shakti layers
andother digital public infrastructure, and placed before the Gram Sabha for
Sec. 1] THE GAZETTE OF IN2D1IA EXTRAORDINARY 21
approval. Works proposed to be undertaken by the Intermediate Panchayat,
District Panchayat or other implementing agencies shall likewise be placed before
the respective Panchayats along with the expected outputs and outcomes. The Viksit
Gram Panchayat Plans shall be aggregated at the Block, District and State levels to
ensure coherence with sectoral priorities, broader rural development strategies, and
saturation-based planning for comprehensive coverage of eligible assets and
outcomes across all Gram Panchayats. All works emerging from the Viksit Gram
Panchayat Plans shall be consolidated into the Viksit Bharat—National Rural
Infrastructure Stack.
(3) Viksit Gram Panchayat Plan—Every Gram Panchayat shall prepare
saturation-mode plans based on its classification into Category A, B, C, etc.,
determined based on development parameters, including proximity to urban areas,
to address the varying needs of the Panchayats. All such works shall be drawn
exclusively from the approved Viksit Gram Panchayat Plan, prepared using PM Gati
Shakti, GIS-based tools and other digital public infrastructure.
(4)The works identified in the Viksit Gram Panchayat Plans shall be executed
through various Central, State and local schemes in convergence. The schemes to
be taken up for such convergence shall be notified by the Central Government.
6. Framework for Convergence and Integrated Planning—A Unified
Convergence Framework shall be established for coherent planning, execution and
monitoring of all works undertaken in rural areas, and for this purpose—
(1) All Central, State or local schemes, as may be notified by the Central
Government for the purpose of convergence and saturation-based planning,
shall be brought under a unified planning process anchored in the Viksit Gram
Panchayat Plans.
(2) All existing assets and proposed works, whether funded under this
Act or through any other Central, State or local scheme, shall be mandatorily
registered and tracked through the Viksit Bharat—National Rural
Infrastructure Stack using the designated digital portal, which shall maintain a
comprehensive register of rural public works, prevent duplication, integrate
departmental investments, and align all works with saturation outcomes.
(3) The Ministry of Rural Development shall prepare and periodically
update the management information system, a nationally harmonised, single
digital backbone for rural public works covering water security, core rural
infrastructure, livelihood-related infrastructure, and special works to mitigate
extreme weather events; and all planning shall follow a strict bottom-up
process beginning with the preparation of the Viksit Gram Panchayat Plan,
which shall be successively aggregated at the Block, District and State levels,
and the aggregated State Plan shall be placed before the State Level Steering
Committee for approval.
(4) Viksit Bharat National Rural Infrastructure Stack shall guide States,
Districts and Panchayati Raj Institutions in identifying priority infrastructure
gaps, standardising work designs, and ensuring that public investments
contribute measurably to saturation outcomes at the Gram Panchayat, Block
and District levels.
(5) This institutional architecture shall ensure a single-plan,
multi-funding approach, promote convergence across departments and
schemes, and align all rural development efforts with the Viksit Bharat @2047
vision of creating productive, resilient and transformative rural assets.
22 THE GAZETTE OF IN2D2IA EXTRAORDINARY [Part II—
7. Intra-State distribution of normative Allocation—The State Government
shall, upon receipt of the approved normative allocation from the Central
Government, ensure equitable, need-based and transparent intra-State distribution
of the allocation across districts and Gram Panchayats, taking into consideration
the categorisation of Gram Panchayats and the assessed local needs for
determining Gram Panchayat-wise allocations and corresponding district
allocations; and the detailed methodology, parameters and procedural
requirements for such distribution shall be notified by the Central Government.
8. Completion of Ongoing Works—At the time of opening new works, it
shall be ensured that ongoing or incomplete works are prioritised for completion,
subject to planning norms and the approved Viksit Gram Panchayat Plans.
9.Technical Estimates and Standards for Works—Every work under this Act
shallhave a technical estimate and design sanctioned by an authority authorised by
the State Government, based on the framework aligned with the Viksit Bharat
National Rural Infrastructure Stack.
10. For works involving construction, appropriate labour-intensive
technologies, depending upon the availability of labour and the use of local
materials, shall be employed to the extent feasible.
11.Bills of quantities shall use clear andcommonly understood terminology
to ensure transparency for allstakeholders.
12. Each work shall haveasummary of the estimate, design and a technical
note indicating the expected outputs and outcomes.
13. All technical estimates, designs and outcome notes shall be generated or
uploaded through digital systems integrated with the designated management
information system.
14. Administrative and Financial Sanctions—(1) Works finalised at the
Gram Panchayat level through the approved Viksit Gram Panchayat Plan and
aggregated at the Block and District levels shall be accorded administrative or
financial sanction by the competent authority as per the requirements and within
thirty days.
(2)The sanctioning authorities shall ensure that—
(a)the proposed works are drawn exclusively from the approved Viksit
Gram Panchayat Plan;
(b) the works are consistent with thematic domains, and the Viksit
Bharat National Rural Infrastructure Stack;
(c) all sanctioned works are taken up through the designated digital
portal under the Act.
15. Muster Rolls and Attendance Systems—The muster rolls for works
undertaken under this Act shall be maintained through digital systems and shall
comply with the following requirements—
(a)Each muster roll shall be in English and the local language and have
a unique electronically generated identity number (e-muster) issued through
the management information system. The muster roll shall include the names
of all workers who have demanded or been allocated work and shall be
authenticated by the authorised functionary of the Gram Panchayat or the
Programme Officer.
(b)Attendance at the worksite shall be recorded daily by an authorised
person using biometric attendance systems, and allattendance details shall be
made available for public viewing on a daily basis through the designated
management information system.
Sec. 1] THE GAZETTE OF IN2D3IA EXTRAORDINARY 23
(c)e-Muster rolls shall be processed by officials in the manner stipulated
under the relevant guidelines.
16.Measurement and Basis for Payment—(1) Payment of wages shall only be
made based on measurements taken at the worksite by authorised technical
personnel within three days of the closure of the muster roll, and recorded digitally
through systems integrated with the designated management information system.
(2)The State Government shall ensure the deployment of adequate technical
personnel to enable timely measurement. Suitable persons may be trained and
deployed, with delegated technical responsibilities, and shall be paid wages at
skilled rates.
17.Wage Linkage to Output and Schedule of Rates—The State Government
shall ensure that wages without any gender bias are linked to the quantum of work
completed, in accordance with the Rural Schedule of Rates notified on the basis of
time-and-motion studies for different types of work and different seasons, and
revised periodically.
18. Special Schedule of Rates for Vulnerable Groups—A separate Schedule
of Rates shall be finalised for women, the elderly, persons with disabilities and
persons with debilitating ailments to facilitate their productive participation in
suitable categories of work.
19.Working Hours and Earning Norms—(a) The Schedule of Rates shall be
framed so that an adult person working for eight hours,inclusive of one hour of rest,
can earn an amount equivalent to the notified wage rate.
(b) Working hours of an adult worker may be flexible but shall not extend
beyond twelve hours in a day, including intervals for rest.
20. Material Component—For all works undertaken under this Act, the cost
of the material component shall not exceed forty per cent. at the District level.
21. Execution Without Contractors—(1) No contractor shall be engaged for
the execution of any work or component financed through expenditure under this
Act. All such works shall be executed directly by the implementing agencies in
accordance with the processes laid down under the Act, including mandatory
proactive disclosures and the social audit process.
(2)In cases of convergence where components of a work are financed under
other schemes, the execution of those components may follow the norms of the
converging scheme, including the use of contractors where permitted.
22.As far as practicable, works executed by the programme implementation
agencies shall be performed by using manual labour and no labour displacing
machines shall be used.
23. Transparent Procurement of Materials—All materials required for the
execution of works shall be procured by the Gram Panchayat or the implementing
agency through transparent procurement systems, including e-tendering processes,
as specified by the State Government.
24. Out of the administrative costs allowed under the Scheme, at least
one-third shall be utilised at the GramPanchayat level to employ and pay the Gram
Rozgar Sahayak, other technical personnel as per the work done and for other
administrative expenses.
25.Transparency and Accountability—(1) Every Scheme prepared under this
Act shall contain comprehensive provisions to ensure transparency and
accountability at all levels of implementation, including Mandatory Public
Disclosure and social audit.
24 THE GAZETTE OF IN2D4IA EXTRAORDINARY [Part II—
(2) Mandatory Public Disclosure—(a) Mandatory Public disclosure shall be
undertaken through digital systems integrated with the designated management
information system and displayed at the village level for public scrutiny.
(b) Display at every worksite a “Janata Board” indicating details of
the work, estimated labour days, material quantities in local terminology, and
item-wise costs.
(c) Digital and physical display of number of days of employment provided,
wage payments, material payments, guarantees under the Act, works approved
under the Viksit Gram Panchayat Plan, and year-wise works taken up or completed
by the Gram Panchayat and other implementing agencies.
(d) Public disclosure of all information relating to works, labour demand,
employment provided, payments, material utilisation and physical progress under
this Act shall be carried out through digital systems integrated with the designated
portal. Weekly disclosures shall be automatically generated and displayed in a
publicly accessible physical and digital formats. In addition, the Gram Panchayat
shall convene weekly disclosure meetings in the Gram Panchayat Bhawan to
present the status of works, payments, grievances and other relevant information
before the community.
(e) The Ministry of Rural Development and the State Departments shall
ensure that their official websites are regularly updated in compliance with
clause (b) of sub-section (1) of section 4 of the Right to Information Act, 2005
(22 of 2005), with all information on the Act available in free, downloadable
electronic form.
(3) Social audit—(a) all works, expenditures and guarantees under this Act
shall be subject to social audit at least once every six months in the manner as may
be prescribed by the Central Government;
(b)the procedure, standards andmodalities for conducting social audits shall
be as prescribed in the rules made under this Act;
(c) until such rules are notified, the provisions of the Mahatma Gandhi
National Rural Employment Guarantee Audit of Schemes Rules, 2011 shall,
mutatis mutandis, apply to the conduct of social audits under this Act.
(4) Concurrent evaluation mechanism—For ensuring measurable
outcomes and real-time accountability, technology-enabled monitoring shall be
mandated for tracking work execution and post-completion asset outcomes,
supported by verified data systems and spatial technologies. Weekly public
disclosures shall be reinforced through a comprehensive transparency framework.
A Concurrent Evaluation Mechanism, as may be specified by the Central
Government through guidelines, shall provide continuous vigilance and enable
timely corrective action.
26. Recovery of misappropriated amounts—(1) Any misappropriation of
amounts spent under the Act shall be recoverable under the relevant revenue laws
for recovery prevailing in the State.
(2) The portion of such recoveries pertaining to the Central share shall be
remitted to the Consolidated Fund of India through the mechanism established by
the Central Government.
Sec. 1] THE GAZETTE OF IN2D5IA EXTRAORDINARY 25
27. Inspection and Quality Control—The State Government shall ensure
regular inspection and supervision of works by designated quality-control teams to
verify adherence to quality standards, accuracy of measurements and conformity of
wage payments to the actual quantum of work executed. Inspection reports shall be
uploaded to the management information system.
28. Grievance Redressal Mechanism—An effective grievance redressal
mechanism shall be established under the Act, comprising the following
components, namely:—
(a)Institutional mechanisms for receiving grievances at the Ward, Gram
Panchayat, Block and District levels, with at least one designated day each
week when officials shall be mandatorily available to receive grievances;
(b)Issuance of a dated acknowledgement for all grievances submitted in
writing, telephonically, online, or orally to any authorised functionary;
(c)Enquiry through spot verification or inspection and disposal shall be
completed within seven working days of receipt of the grievance;
(d) Upon completion of the enquiry, the concerned authority shall
initiate immediate corrective action, and the grievance shall be resolved within
fifteen days;
(e) Failure to dispose of a grievance within seven working days at the
level determined, shall be treated as a contravention of the provisions of this
Act and shall attract action in accordance with section 27 or any corresponding
provision of this Act;
(f) Where prima facie evidence of financial irregularity is revealed
during preliminary enquiry or through findings of the social audit report, the
District Programme Coordinator shall, after obtaining legal advice, ensure that
a First Information Report is lodged and necessary proceedings initiated;
(g) The concerned authority shall inform the complainant in writing,
physically or digitally, of the conclusions of the enquiry and the steps taken
for redressal;
(h) Action taken on grievances received by all implementing agencies
shall be placed before the meetings of the Intermediate Panchayat and the
District Panchayat for review and monitoring;
(i) Appeals against the orders of the Gram Panchayat shall lie
before the Programme Officer; appeals against the orders of the Programme
Officer shall lie before the District Programme Coordinator; appeals against
the orders of the District Programme Coordinator shall lie before the State
Grievance Redressal Authority or any officer designated by the State
Government;
(j)All appeals shall be filed within forty-five days from the date of the
order;
(k) All appeals shall be disposed of within thirty days from the date of
receipt;
(l) Any grievance not resolved within fifteen days at the Ward, Gram
Panchayat, Block or District level shall be automatically escalated to the next
higher level through digital systems integrated with the designated
management information system, and such escalations shall be continuously
monitored electronically.
26 THE GAZETTE OF IN2D6IA EXTRAORDINARY [Part II—
29. Ombudsperson—The State Government shall appoint an Ombudsperson
for each District to receive grievances, conduct enquiries and issue awards in
accordance with the guidelines notified by the Central and the State Governments.
The Ombudsperson shall operate through digital platforms integrated with the
designated digital portal under this Act.
30. Action for Contravention—Wherever contravention of any provision of
this Act is established after due enquiry by the State Government, the District
Programme Coordinator, the Programme Officer, the Ombudsperson or any other
authority authorised by the State Government, action shall be taken in accordance
with section 27 of this Act or any corresponding provision.
31.Annual Reporting—The District Programme Coordinator, the Programme
Officer and each Gram Panchayat shall prepare an annual report detailing facts,
figures and achievements relating to the implementation of the Scheme within their
jurisdiction. A copy of such report shall be made available to the public in physical
or electronic form, on payment of such fee as may be specified in the Scheme.
32.All accounts and records including muster rolls relating to the scheme shall
be made available for public scrutiny free of cost. Any person desirous of obtaining
a copy or relevant extracts therefrom may be provided such copies or extracts on
demand not later than three working days from the date of receipt of application.
33. Capacity Building and Strengthening Panchayats—There shall be a
dedicated plan for training, Information Education Communication, digital literacy
and strengthening Panchayati Raj Institutions.
Sec. 1] THE GAZETTE OF INDIA EXTRAORDINARY 27
SCHEDULEII
[Seesection 9(2)]
1. Gramin Rozgar Guarantee Card—(1) Household Registration—The adult
member of every household residing in any rural area and willing to undertake
unskilled manual work, may submit the names, ages and address of the household
to the Gram Panchayat within whose jurisdiction they reside, for the purpose of
registration of the household and issuance of a Gramin Rozgar Guarantee Card.
(2)Special Gramin Rozgar Guarantee Card, where the job seeker is—
(a)a single woman; or
(b)a person with disability; or
(c)persons above sixty years of age; or
(d)a released bonded labourer; or
(e)a person belonging to a Particularly Vulnerable TribalGroup; or
(f)a transgender person.
(3) The Special Gramin Rozgar Guarantee Card of a distinct colour, shall
ensure special protection in the providing work, work evaluation, and worksite
facilities, as applicable.
(4)It shall be the duty of the Gram Panchayat, after making such enquiry, as
it deems fit, to issue a Gramin Rozgar Guarantee Card within fifteen days from the
date of receipt of such application, containing therein a unique Gramin Rozgar
Guarantee Card number with details of the registered adult members of the
household, their photos, Bank or Post office account number, insurance policy
number and the Aadhaar numbers,if any.
(5)The Gramin Rozgar Guarantee Card issued, shall be valid for three years,
after which it may be renewed after due verification.
(6)No Gramin Rozgar Guarantee Card shall be cancelled except on any of the
following grounds—
(a)where it is found to be a duplicate;
(b) where the entire household has permanently migrated to a place
outside the jurisdiction of the Gram Panchayat and no longer resides in the
village; or
(c)where all adult members of the registered household are deceased.
(7)The State Government shall make arrangements for updating the following
details in the Gramin Rozgar Guarantee Card regularly while mentioning the key
guaranteesunder the Actareclearly listed as follows:—
(a)number of days for which work was demanded;
(b)number of days of work allocated;
(c)description of the work allocated along with the muster roll number;
(d)measurement details;
(e)unemployment allowance, if any, paid;
(f)date-wise amount of wages paid;
(g)delay compensation paid if any;
(h)asset provided, if any.
27
28 THE GAZETTE OF IN2D8IA EXTRAORDINARY [Part II—
2. Demand for work—(1) Every adult member of a registered household
whose name appears in the Gramin Rozgar Guarantee Card, shall be entitled to
apply for unskilled manual work under the Scheme; and every such application shall
be compulsorily registered, and a receipt issued with the date, which shall be entered
in the given digital platform.
(2) The State shall proactively verify the requirements of the Vulnerable
Groups and provide them with work.
(3)Application for work may be oral or written and made to the Ward member
or to the Gram Panchayat or to the Programme Officer or any person authorised by
the State Government or through digital platforms, or through any other means
authorised by the State Government.
(4)Applications for work maybe filed individually or for a group together.
(5)There shall be no limit on the number of days of employment for which a
person may apply, or on the number of days of employment actually provided to
him subject to the aggregate guarantee of the household.
(6)Normally, applications for work must be for at least six days of continuous
work.
(7) Provision shall be made in the Scheme for advance application, that is,
application which may be submitted earlier than the date from which employment
is sought.
(8) Provision shall be made in the Scheme for submission of multiple
applications by the same person provided that the corresponding periods for which
employment is sought do not overlap.
3.Allocation of work—(1) The Gram Panchayat and Programme Officer shall
ensure that every applicant shall be provided unskilled manual work in accordance
with the provisions of the Scheme within fifteen days of receipt of an
application or the date from which he seeks work in case of advance application,
whichever is later.
(2) Priority shall be given to women in such a way that at least one-third of
the beneficiaries shall be women who have registered and requested for work.
Efforts to increase participation of single women and the person with disabilities
shall be made.
(3) Applicants who are provided with work shall be so intimated
in writing, by means of a letter sent to him at the address given in the Gramin
Rozgar Guarantee Card or through any other effective mode of communication
or by a public notice displayed at the office of the Panchayats at district,
intermediate or village level.
(4) A list of persons who are provided with the work shall be displayed on the
notice board of the Gram Panchayat and at the office of the Programme Officer and
at such other place as the Programme Officer may deem necessary and the list shall
be open for inspection by the State Government and any interested person.
(5) As far as possible, the employment shall be provided within a radius of
five kilometers of the village wherethe applicant resides at the time of applying.
Sec. 1] THE GAZETTE OF IN2D9IA EXTRAORDINARY 29
(6)A new work under the Scheme can be commenced if at least ten labourers
become available for work, provided that this condition shall not be applicable for
new works, as determined by the State Government, in hilly areas and in respect of
afforestation works.
(7) In case the employment is provided outside the radius specified in
sub-paragraph (5) of paragraph 3, it shall be provided within the Block, and the
labourers shall be paid ten per cent. of the wage rate as extra wages to meet
additional transportation and expenses for living.
(8) A period of employment shall be for at least six days continuously, with
not more than six days in a week.
4. Worksite management—(1) For the purpose of transparency at the
worksite, the following shall be ensured—
(a)thereshall be a project initiationmeetingin whichvariousprovisions
ofthe work shall be explained to the workers;
(b) a copy of the sanction work order shall be available for public
inspection at the worksite;
(c)measurement recordof eachwork and detailsof theworkersshall be
available for public inspection;
(d)a Citizens’ Information Board shall be put up at every worksite and
updated regularly in the manner specified by the CentralGovernment;
(e) the vigilance and Monitoring Committee set up according to the
instructions of the Central Government may check all works and its evaluation
report will be recorded in the Works Register in the format specified by the
Central Government and submitted to the Gram Sabha during the Social
Audit.
(2)Thefacilities of safedrinkingwater,shadefor childrenandperiodsof rest,
first aid box with adequate material for emergency treatment for minor injuries and
other health hazards connected with the work being performed shall be provided at
the worksite.
(3)In case the number of children below the age of five years accompanying
the women working at any site is five or more, provisions shall be made to depute
one of such women workers to look after such children. The person so deputed shall
be paid wage rate.
5.Welfare—(1) If any personal injury is caused to any person employed under
the Scheme by any accident arising out of and in the course of his employment, he
shall be entitled to such medical treatment as required, free of cost.
(2) Where hospitalisation of the injured worker is necessary, the State
Government shall arrange for such hospitalisation including accommodation,
treatment, medicines and payment of daily allowance which is not less than half of
the wage rate.
(3) If a person employed under the Scheme meets with death or becomes
permanently disabled by accident arising out of and in the course of employment,
he or his legal heirs, as the case may be, shall be paid by the implementing agency
an ex gratia as per entitlement under the Pradhan Mantri Suraksha Bima Yojana
or as may be notified by the Central Government.
(4) If any personal injury is caused by accident to a child accompanying a
person who is employed under the Scheme, such person shall be entitled to medical
treatment free of cost; and in case of death or disablement of the child due to the
said accident, ex gratia shall be paid to the legal guardians as determined by the
State Government.
30 THE GAZETTE OF IN3D0IA EXTRAORDINARY [Part II—
6.Wage payment—(1) In case the payment of wages is not made within fifteen
days from the date of closure of the muster roll, the wage seekers shall be entitled
to receive payment of compensation for the delay, at the rate of 0.05% of the unpaid
wages per day of delay beyond the sixteenth day of closure of muster roll.
(2) Any delay in payment of compensation beyond a period of fifteen days
from the date it becomes payable, shall be considered in the same manner as the
delay in payment of wages.
(3) For the purpose of ensuring accountability in payment of wages and to
calculate culpability of various functionaries or agencies, the States shall divide
the processes leading to determination and payment of wages into various stages
such as,—
(a)measurement of work;
(b)computerising the muster rolls;
(c)computerising the measurements;
(d)generation of wage lists; and
(e) uploading Fund Transfer Orders (FTOs), and specify stage-wise
maximum time limits along with the functionary or agency which is
responsible for discharging the specific function.
(4)The computer system shall have a provision to automatically calculate the
compensation payable based on the date of closure of the muster roll and the date of
deposit of wages in the accounts of the wage seekers.
(5) The State Government shall pay the compensation upfront after due
verification within the time limits as specified above and recover the compensation
amount from the functionaries or agencies who are responsible for the delay in
payment.
(6)It shall be the duty of the District Programme Coordinator or Programme
Officer to ensure that the system is operationalise.
(7)The number of days of delay, the compensation payable and actually paid
shall be reflected in the Management Information System.
(8) Effective implementation of sub-paragraph (1) shall be considered
necessary for the purposes of section 29 of the Act.
7. The payment of wages shall, unless so exempted by the Central
Government, be made through the individual savings accounts of the workers in the
relevant Banks or Post Offices.
8. In case of employment provided under the Scheme, there shall be no
discrimination solely on the ground of gender and the provisions of the Equal
Remuneration Act, 1976 (25 of 1976), shall be complied with.
9.Record maintenance and grievance redressalsystem—The Gram Panchayat
shall prepare and maintain or cause to be prepared and maintained such registers,
vouchers and other documents in such form and in such manner as may be specified
in the Scheme containing particulars of Gramin Rozgar Guarantee Cards and pass
books issued, name, age and address of the head of the household and the adult
members of the households registered with the Gram Panchayat.
10. (1) Notwithstanding anything contained in this Schedule, in the event of
any national calamity such as flood, cyclone, tsunami and earthquake resulting in
mass dislocation of rural population, the adult members of rural households of areas
so affected may—
Sec. 1] THE GAZETTE OF IN3D1IA EXTRAORDINARY 31
(a) seek for registration and get Gramin Rozgar Guarantee Card issued
by the Gram Panchayat or Programme Officer of the area of temporary
relocation;
(b) submit written or oral applications for work to the Programme
OfficerortheGramPanchayat of the area of temporary relocation; and
(c)apply for re-registration and re-issuance of Gramin Rozgar Guarantee
Card in the event ofany loss ordestruction.
(2)Thedetails of such Gramin Rozgar Guarantee Cards shall beintimated to
the District Programme Coordinator.
(3)In the event of restorationof normalcy, the Gramin Rozgar Guarantee Card
so issued shall be re-endorsed at original place of habitation and clubbed with the
original Gramin Rozgar Guarantee Card on being retrieved.
(4) The number of days of employment provided shall be counted while
computing 125 days of guaranteed employment per household.
11. Every worker shall have an opportunity of being heard and register any
grievance either orally or in writing, at all implementation levels for disposal as per
the provisions of the Grievance Redressal Mechanism under the Scheme.
———
DR. RAJIV MANI,
The above Bill has been passed by the Houses of Parliament.
Secretary to the Govt. of India.
Dated the Speaker.
———
I assent to this Bill.
Dated the President.
UPLOADED BY THE MANAGER, GOVERNMENT OF INDIA PRESS, MINTO ROAD, NEW DELHI–110002
AND PUBLISHED BY THE CONTROLLER OF PUBLICATIONS, DELHI–110054.
MGIPMRND—408GI(S4)—21-12-2025.
