AS INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA
Bill No. 194 of 2025
THE VIKSIT BHARAT SHIKSHA ADHISHTHAN
BILL, 2025
———
ARRANGEMENT OF CLAUSES
———
CHAPTER I
PRELIMINARY
CLAUSES
1. Short title and commencement.
2. Application of Act.
3. Definitions.
4. Aims and purposes of Act.
CHAPTER II
VIKSIT BHARAT SHIKSHA ADHISHTHAN
5. Constitution of Viksit Bharat Shiksha Adhishthan.
6. Composition of Commission.
7. Responsibility of Chairperson and Member-Secretary of Commission.
8. Meetings of Commission.
9. Functions of Commission.
CHAPTER III
VIKSIT BHARAT SHIKSHA VINIYAMAN PARISHAD
10. Establishment of Regulatory Council.
11. Functions of Regulatory Council.
12. Establishment of constituent colleges, etc.
CHAPTER IV
VIKSIT BHARAT SHIKSHA GUNVATTA PARISHAD
13. Establishment of Accreditation Council.
14. Functions of Accreditation Council.
CHAPTER V
VIKSIT BHARAT SHIKSHA MANAK PARISHAD
15. Establishment of Standards Council.
16. Functions of Standards Council.
CHAPTER VI
GENERAL PROVISIONS
17. Right to confer degrees.
18. Qualification and appointment of Chairperson of Commission.
19. Qualification for appointment as Presidents and full-time Members of
Councils.
(ii)
CLAUSES
20. Appointment of Presidents and Members of Councils and Member
Secretary of Commission and Councils.
21. Search-cum-Selection Committee.
22. Term of office for Chairperson, Presidents of Councils, Members of
Councils and nominees of States and Union territories.
23. Filling of casual vacancies in Commission or Councils.
24. Removal of Chairperson or any other Member of Commission or
Presidents or Members of Councils.
25. Declaration by Chairperson or any other Member of Commission or
Presidents or Members of Councils.
26. Restriction of reemployment.
27. Salary, allowances and other terms and conditions of service of
Presidents and other full-time Members of respective Councils and
Member-Secretary of Commission and Councils.
28. Vacancy, etc., not to invalidate proceedings of Commission or
Councils.
29. Oath of office.
30. Head offices of Commission and Councils.
31. Secretariats for Commission and Councils.
32. Members, etc., to be public servants.
CHAPTER VII
CONTRAVENTIONS, PENALTIES AND ADJUDICATION
33. Penalties.
34. Adjudication of penalties.
35. Crediting sums realised by penalties.
36. Penalty not to affect interest of students.
37. Appeal against order or decisions of Commission or Councils.
CHAPTER VIII
FINANCE, ACCOUNTS AND AUDIT
38. Grants by Central Government.
39. Fund of Commission.
40. Budget.
41. Accounts and audit.
42. Furnishing of returns and reports to Central Government.
CHAPTER IX
MISCELLANEOUS
43. Temporary association of persons with Commission or Councils for
particular purposes.
44. Authentication of orders and other instruments of Commission and of
each Council.
45. Power of Central Government to issue directions.
(iii)
CLAUSES
46. Delegation of powers.
47. Power of Central Government to supersede Commission and Councils
established under this Act.
48. Protection of action taken in good faith.
49. Act to have overriding effect.
50. Power to make rules.
51. Power to make regulations.
52. Laying before Parliament.
53. Power to remove difficulties.
54. Transitional provision.
55. Repeal and savings.
AS INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA
Bill No. 194 of 2025
THE VIKSIT BHARAT SHIKSHA ADHISHTHAN BILL, 2025
A
BILL
to enable and empower the Universities and other higher educational institutions to
achieve excellence in teaching, learning, research and innovation, through
co-ordination and determination of standards in institutions for higher
education or research and scientific and technical institutions, and for that
purpose to constitute a Viksit Bharat Shiksha Adhishthan, to facilitate the
Universities and other higher educational institutions to become independent
self-governing institutions and to promote excellence through a robust and
transparent system of accreditation and autonomy, and for matters connected
therewith or incidental thereto.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Seventy-sixth Year of the Republic of India
as follows:––
CHAPTER I
PRELIMINARY
5 1.(1) This Act may be called the Viksit Bharat Shiksha Adhishthan Act, 2025. Short title and
commencement.
(2) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by
notification in the Official Gazette, appoint.
2
Application of 2. (1) This Act shall apply to––
Act.
(a) all Institutions of national importance established by an Act of
Parliament, under the administrative purview of the Ministry of Education in
the Government of India;
(b) such other Institutions of national importance, established by an Act 5
of Parliament, as may be notified by the Central Government in the Official
Gazette;
(c) Universities in India, established or incorporated by or under a
Central Act or a State Act or any other institution declared as a deemed to be
University by any notification by the Department of Higher Education, 10
Ministry of Education in the Government of India under the provisions of
section 3 of the University Grants Commission Act, 1956, before this Act
3 of 1956.
came into force;
(d) colleges and such other higher educational institutions affiliated with
the Universities or higher educational institutions falling under the purview of 15
this Act;
(e) institutions regulated under the Architects Act, 1972; 20 of 1972.
(f) institutions regulated under the All India Council for Technical
Education Act, 1987; 52 of 1987.
(g) institutions regulated under the National Council for Teacher 20
Education Act, 1993; 73 of 1993.
(h) institutions of open and distance learning, online education and
digital education recognised by the University Grants Commission;
(i) institutions of eminence;
(j) institutions regulated by such other Professional Councils as may be 25
notified by the Central Government; and
(k) other programmes and institutions as may be notified by the Central
Government.
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in the Architects Act, 1972, or any
20 of 1972.
other Act governing the regulation of higher education and open and distance 30
learning, or online education and digital education, the provisions of this Act shall
apply to any matter concerning the co-ordination and determination of standards in
higher educational institutions:
Provided that nothing contained in this Act shall be construed as restricting
the powers of Council of Architecture constituted under the Architects Act, 1972 to 35 20 of 1972.
regulate their professional practice.
Explanation.––For the purposes of this Act, the expression professional
practice refers to a practice whereby a person is registered to practice the said
profession under the provisions of the Architects Act, 1972. 20 of 1972.
(3) The provisions of this Act shall not apply to such professional programmes 40
of institutions regulated by––
(a) the Pharmacy Council of India constituted under the Pharmacy
8 of 1948.
Council of India Act, 1948;
(b) the Bar Council of India constituted under the Advocates Act, 1961; 25 of 1961.
(c) the Veterinary Council of India established under the Indian 45
52 of 1984.
Veterinary Council Act, 1984;
3
(d) the Rehabilitation Council of India constituted under the
34 of 1992. Rehabilitation Council of India Act, 1992;
(e) the National Medical Commission constituted under the National
30 of 2019. Medical Commission Act, 2019;
5 (f) the National Commission for Indian System of Medicine constituted
14 of 2020. under the National Commission for Indian System of Medicine Act, 2020;
(g) the National Commission for Homoeopathy constituted under the
National Commission for Homoeopathy Act, 2020;
15 of 2020.
(h) the National Commission for Allied and Healthcare Professions
10 constituted under the National Commission for Allied and Healthcare
14 of 2021. Professions Act, 2021;
(i) the National Nursing and Midwifery Commission constituted under
26 of 2023. the National Nursing and Midwifery Commission Act, 2023;
(j) the National Dental Commission constituted under the National
21 of 2023. 15 Dental Commission Act, 2023;
(k) such other programmes, institutions, commissions or councils, as
may be notified by the Central Government:
Provided that such professional programmes may be offered by any
higher educational institution falling under the provisions of this Act, subject
20 to fulfilment of such statutory requirements as laid down in this regard by the
concerned statutory body.
3. (1) In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,–– Definitions.
(a) “accreditation” with its grammatical variations, means the process of
quality control in higher education, whereby, as a result of evaluation or
25 assessment or by any other scientific method defined by the Accreditation
Council, a higher educational institution or any programme conducted therein
is recognised as achieving set and graded levels of quality, self-governance
and autonomy;
(b) “Accreditation Council” means the Viksit Bharat Shiksha Gunvatta
30 Parishad established by the Central Government under sub-section (1) of
section 13;
(c) “accrediting institutions” means all such institutions recognised or
empanelled or authorised by the Viksit Bharat Shiksha Gunvatta Parishad for
assessment and accreditation of the higher educational institutions and
35 programs, courses conducted by University or higher educational institutions;
(d) “affiliation” together with its grammatical variations, includes, in
relation to a college or higher educational institution,––
(i) recognition of such college or higher educational institution by
a University;
(ii) association of such college or higher educational institution
40
with a University; or
(iii) admission of such college or higher educational institution to
the privileges of a University;
(e) “Central Government” means the Ministry or Department in the
45 Government of India dealing with higher education;
4
(f) “certificate” means such award, not being a degree or diploma
granted by a University or higher educational institution or any other
institution, certifying that the recipient has successfully completed a
programme or course of study;
(g) “Chairperson” means the Chairperson of the Commission appointed 5
under section 18;
(h) “college” means any institution, whether known as such or by any
other name, which provides a course of study for obtaining any qualification
such as a certificate, diploma or degree from a University and which, in
accordance with the rules and regulations or statutes and ordinances of such 10
University, is recognised as competent to provide for such programmes or
courses of study and to present students undergoing such courses of study for
the award of such qualification, and includes a college maintained or admitted
to its privilege by the University, an affiliated college and a constituent college
and such college which may be authorised to grant degrees under 1 5
sub-section (4) of section 11.
Explanation.––For the purposes of this clause, the expression
“constituent college” means an institution recognised as such by the
University;
(i) “Commission” means the Viksit Bharat Shiksha Adhishthan 20
constituted under section 5;
(j) “Council” means any of the three independent verticals of the
Commission, namely, the Viksit Bharat Shiksha Viniyaman Parishad or the
Viksit Bharat Shiksha Gunvatta Parishad or the Viksit Bharat Shiksha Manak
Parishad established under this Act; 25
(k) “degree” means such award, not being a diploma or certificate,
granted by a University or higher educational institution or any other
institution, certifying that the recipient has successfully completed a
programme or course of study;
(l) “diploma” means such award, not being a certificate or degree 30
granted by a University or higher educational institution or any other
institution, certifying that the recipient has successfully completed a
programme or course of study;
(m) “eminent experts” shall mean persons of ability, integrity and
standing who have knowledge of or experience in such areas including 35
teaching, agriculture, commerce, industry, forestry, skill sector or members of
the engineering or legal or medical or any other profession, or in the opinion
of the Central Government educationalists of repute or have obtained high
academic distinction;
(n) “Fund” means the Viksit Bharat Shiksha Adhishthan Fund 40
constituted under section 39;
(o) “higher educational institution” means an institution of learning
including a University, a college, a technical institution, an Institution of
national importance, an institution of eminence or a constituent unit of such
institution, which is imparting higher education or conducting research 45
therein;
(p) “institution of eminence” means a higher educational institution
declared as such by the Department of Higher Education Ministry of
Education in the Government of India;
(q) “Institution of national importance” means an institution declared as 50
such by an Act of Parliament;
5
(r) “Member” means a Member of the Commission or the Councils and
includes its Chairperson or President;
(s) “notification” means a notification published in the Official Gazette
and the expression “notified” shall be construed accordingly;
5 (t) “prescribed” means prescribed by rules made by the Central
Government under this Act;
(u) “President” means the President of the respective Councils
established under the provisions of this Act;
(v) “regulations” means the regulations made by the Commission or the
10 Councils, as the case may be, under this Act;
(w) “Regulatory Council” means the Viksit Bharat Shiksha Viniyaman
Parishad established by the Central Government under sub-section (1) of
section 10;
(x) “Standards Council” means the Viksit Bharat Shiksha Manak
15 Parishad established by the Central Government under sub-section (1) of
section 15;
(y) “University” means a University established or incorporated by or
under a Central Act, a State Act or any institution declared a deemed to be
3 of 1956.
University under the provisions of section 3 of the University Grants
20 Commission Act, 1956.
4. The aims and purposes of this Act is to provide an effective, enabling and Aims and
responsive system of regulation to encourage integrity, excellence and p u r p o s e s of Act.
public-spiritedness in higher education that is enabled through the following guiding
principles, namely:––
25 (a) functions to be performed independently by the Regulatory Council,
the Accreditation Council and the Standards Council;
(b) responsive and minimalistic regulation to ensure public-spiritedness,
good governance, financial stability and probity, and transparent public
disclosure of all academic, operational and financial matters; and
30 (c) focus on system outcomes and not solely on inputs, through a
transparent system that provides intellectual and moral leadership.
CHAPTER II
VIKSIT BHARAT SHIKSHA ADHISHTHAN
5. (1) With effect from such date as the Central Government may, by Constitution of
35 notification, appoint, there shall be constituted a Commission to be known as the Viksit Bharat
Viksit Bharat Shiksha Adhishthan to exercise the powers conferred upon, and
Shiksha
Adhishthan.
perform the functions assigned to it, under this Act.
(2) The Commission shall be a body corporate by the name aforesaid having
perpetual succession and a common seal with power, subject to the provisions of
40 this Act, to acquire, hold and dispose of property, both movable and immovable,
and to contract and shall, by the said name, sue or be sued.
6. (1) The Commission shall consist of a Chairperson and other Members, not Composition of
exceeding twelve in number. Commission.
(2) Of the twelve Members referred to in sub-section (1), there shall be—
45 (a) President of the Regulatory Council—ex officio Member;
6
(b) President of the Accreditation Council—ex officio Member;
(c) President of the Standards Council—ex officio Member;
(d) Secretary to the Government of India in the Ministry of Education,
Department of Higher Education—ex officio Member;
(e) two eminent and distinguished academicians not below the rank of
5
Professor from the State Higher Educational Institutions—Members;
(f) five eminent experts—Members;
(g) Member Secretary.
(3) The Members referred to in clauses (e) and (f) of sub-section (2), shall act
10
as part-time Members.
Responsibility of
7. (1) The Chairperson shall preside over the meetings of the Commission,
Chairperson and decide the agenda, and approve the proceedings of the meetings of the Commission.
Member-Secretary
of Commission. (2) The Member-Secretary shall act as full-time Member of the Commission
and shall function as the Chief Executive Officer and ensure general
superintendence and co-ordination with respect to all administrative matters of the 15
Commission.
Meetings of 8. (1) The Commission shall meet at such places and times, and shall follow
Commission. such rules of procedure in regard to the transaction of business at its meetings
(including quorum at such meetings), in such manner as may be specified by the
regulations, in consultation with the Central Government. 20
(2) All questions which come up before any meeting of the Commission shall
be decided by a majority of the votes of the Members present and voting, and in the
event of an equality of votes, the Chairperson, or in his absence, the Member chosen
by other Members to preside over the meeting, shall have a second or casting vote.
25
(3) The Commission may invite, as special invitees, the Heads of such other
bodies as the Commission deems fit:
Provided that when the Commission is deciding upon a matter pertaining to
the exclusive domain of any specific Professional Body, the Commission may invite
nominees of the said Body.
30
9. Subject to the provisions of this Act, the Commission shall discharge and
Functions of
Commission. perform the following functions, namely:––
(a) to provide high level strategic direction for comprehensive and
holistic growth of higher education and research in a competitive global
environment;
35
(b) to develop a roadmap for transforming higher educational institutions
into large multi-disciplinary education and research institutions;
(c) to develop a roadmap for promoting India as an education
destination;
(d) to develop a roadmap for integration and promotion of Bharatiya
knowledge, languages and arts across the multi-disciplinary higher 4 0
education system;
(e) to provide strategic direction for synergistic functioning of the
Councils established under this Act and ensure co-ordination between them;
(f) to give directions to the Councils for the purposes of co-ordination;
(g) to provide financial support for proper functioning of the Councils; 45
7
(h) to formulate and suggest such schemes to the Central Government
for improvement of quality of education;
(i) to recommend to the Central Government to create one or more
Bodies for furtherance of the objectives of this Act;
5 (j) to advise the Central Government or any State Government on any
question which may be referred to the Commission by the Central Government
or the State Government, as the case may be;
(k) to advise the Central Government or any State Government, as the case
may be, on any question which is considered as important by the Commission for
10 the holistic development of higher education in the country; and
(l) to perform such other functions, as may be prescribed.
CHAPTER III
VIKSIT BHARAT SHIKSHA VINIYAMAN PARISHAD
10. (1) With effect from such date as the Central Government may, by Establishment of
Regulatory
15 notification, appoint, there shall be established a Regulatory Council to be known
Council.
as the Viksit Bharat Shiksha Viniyaman Parishad, which shall function as the
common regulator of higher education in India.
(2) The Regulatory Council referred to in sub-section (1), shall be a body
corporate by the name aforesaid having perpetual succession and a common seal
20 with power, subject to the provisions of this Act, to acquire, hold and dispose of
property, both movable and immovable, and to contract and shall, by the said name,
sue or be sued.
(3) The Regulatory Council shall be headed by a President and shall consist
of other Members, not exceeding fourteen in number.
25 (4) Of the fourteen Members referred to in sub-section (3), there shall be—
(a) two eminent and distinguished academicians not below the rank
of Professor—Members;
(b) one eminent and distinguished academician not below the rank of
Professor from a State Higher Educational Institution—Member;
30 (c) one person representing the Council of Architecture—Member;
(d) three eminent and distinguished academicians not below the rank of
Professor from the Institutions of national importance—Members;
(e) one nominee of States and Union territories, on a rotation
basis—Member;
35 (f) two eminent experts—Members;
(g) one nominee of the Department of Higher Education in the Ministry
of Education, who shall not be below the rank of Joint Secretary to the
Government of India—ex officio Member;
(h) one Member to be nominated by the Accreditation Council from
40 amongst its Members—ex officio Member;
(i) one Member to be nominated by the Standards Council from amongst
its Members—ex officio Member;
(j) Member Secretary:
Provided that the Members referred to in clauses (a) and (j) of this
45 sub-section, shall act as full-time Members and the Members referred to in
clauses (b), (c), (d), (e) and (f) shall act as part-time Members.
8
(5) The Regulatory Council may invite such experts as may be determined by
it as special invitees for its meetings in such manner as may be specified by
regulations made by it, in consultation with the Central Government:
Provided that when the Regulatory Council is deciding upon a matter
pertaining to the exclusive domain of any specific professional body, it may invite 5
nominee of the said body.
Functions of 11. (1) The Regulatory Council shall take all such steps as it may deem fit for
Regulatory the co-ordination and maintenance of standards and compliance of regulatory
Council.
provisions in higher educational institutions.
(2) Without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing provisions, the steps 10
referred to in sub-section (1), may provide for all or any of the following matters,
namely:—
(a) to require that all higher educational institutions attain full
accreditation and thereby autonomy in a graded manner, to transform the
current higher education sector into one comprising autonomous, vibrant and 15
empowered multidisciplinary higher educational institutions with high quality
education, research and service including integrated vocational education,
training and skilling programs;
(b) to require full online and offline public self-disclosure of all finances,
audits, procedures, infrastructure, faculty, courses, educational outcomes and 20
accreditation related information by higher educational institutions on a public
website maintained by the Regulatory Council and on the websites of
institutions;
(c) to require that all academic, administrative and financial affairs of
higher educational institutions are conducted lawfully and reported truthfully 25
and transparently on the public website maintained by Regulatory Council and
on the websites of institutions;
(d) to develop a coherent policy to prevent commercialisation of higher
education;
(e) to develop and implement a systematic plan for disclosure of key 30
financial matters by higher educational institutions and require that the
auditing and financial disclosure standards of higher educational institutions
are adhered to;
(f) to take swift corrective action in not later than sixty days in cases of
dishonest public self-disclosure or any other academic, administrative or 35
financial impropriety;
(g) to require that students have free access to a fair, transparent and
robust grievance redressal mechanism;
(h) to dispose of complaints or grievances received against the higher
educational institutions from the stakeholders; 40
(i) to provide that the minimum standards for setting up and operation of
higher educational institutions as determined by the Standards Council are
complied with;
(j) to develop a model and roadmap for setting up and operation of higher
educational institutions; 45
(k) to facilitate autonomy of higher educational institutions in a graded
and time bound manner;
(l) to specify standards for select foreign universities to operate in India,
with the prior approval of the Central Government:
9
Provided that for the foreign university campuses which were already
set up in India and governed by the existing regulations of the University
Grants Commission, notified before the commencement of this Act, the
powers vested with the “University Grants Commission” therein, shall vest
5 with the Regulatory Council;
(m) facilitate high performing Indian Universities to set up campuses in
other countries, with the prior approval of the Central Government;
(n) require that only suitably accredited higher educational institutions
offer open and distance learning, online education and digital education;
10 (o) decide on the continuance of functioning and maintenance of
inter-University centres established under clause (ccc) of section 12 of
3 of 1956. the University Grants Commission Act, 1956, which were in existence
before the commencement of the Act, in consultation with the Central
Government;
15 (p) recommend to any higher educational institution the measures
necessary for the improvement of higher education and advise the higher
educational institution upon the action to be taken for the purpose of
implementing such recommendation;
(q) furnish such information to the Commission, as the Commission may
20 require, in connection with the performance of its functions under this
Act; and
(r) perform such other functions, as may be prescribed.
(3) The functions to be discharged by the Regulatory Council under clauses
referred to in sub-section (2), other than clauses (c), (e), (j), (o), (p), (q) and (r), shall
25 be such as may be specified by the regulations made by the Regulatory Council in
this regard.
(4) The Regulatory Council may authorise any accredited higher educational
institution, other than a University, to grant degrees in such manner as may be
specified by the regulations by the Regulatory Council, with the prior approval of
30 the Central Government:
Provided that the Regulatory Council may, with the prior approval of the
Central Government, revoke such authorisation accorded to a higher educational
institution, if such institution violates the provisions of this Act or the rules and
regulations made thereunder:
35 Provided further that no such authorisation shall be revoked without providing
an opportunity of being heard.
(5) The Regulatory Council shall take measures to facilitate colleges to attain,
required accreditation benchmarks, and eventually become autonomous
degree-granting colleges.
40 (6) The Regulatory Council shall meet at such places and times, and follow
such rules of procedure in regard to the transaction of business at its meetings
(including quorum at such meetings), as may be specified by the regulations made
by the Regulatory Council in consultation with the Central Government.
12. (1) Notwithstanding anything contained in this Act, any existing or newly Establishment of
45 accredited University shall establish constituent colleges, off-campuses and constituent
colleges, etc.
multiple campuses, only with prior approval of the Regulatory Council.
(2) The manner of establishing constituent colleges, off-campuses and
multiple campuses, shall be such as may be prescribed.
10
CHAPTER IV
VIKSIT BHARAT SHIKSHA GUNVATTA PARISHAD
Establishment of 13. (1) With effect from such date as the Central Government may, by
Accreditation notification, appoint, there shall be established an Accreditation Council to be
Council.
known as the Viksit Bharat Shiksha Gunvatta Parishad. 5
(2) The Accreditation Council referred to in sub-section (1) shall be a body
corporate by the name aforesaid having perpetual succession and a common seal
with power, subject to the provisions of this Act, to acquire, hold and dispose of
property, both movable and immovable, and to contract and shall, by the said name,
sue or be sued. 10
(3) The Accreditation Council shall consist of a President and other Members,
not exceeding fourteen in number.
(4) Of the fourteen Members referred to in sub-section (3), there shall be––
(a) two eminent and distinguished academicians, not below the rank of
Professor—Members; 15
(b) two eminent and distinguished academicians, not below the rank of
Professor from State Higher Educational Institutions—Members;
(c) one person representing the Council of Architecture—Member;
(d) three eminent and distinguished academicians not below the rank of
Professor from the Institutions of national importance—Members; 20
(e) one nominee of the Department of Higher Education in the Ministry
of Education, who shall not be below the rank of Joint Secretary to the
Government of India—ex officio Member;
(f) two eminent experts—Members;
(g) one Member to be nominated by the Regulatory Council from 25
amongst its Members—ex officio Member;
(h) one Member to be nominated by the Standards Council from amongst
its Members—ex officio Member;
(i) Member Secretary:
Provided that the Members referred to in clauses (a) and (i) shall act as full- 30
time Members and the Members referred to in clauses (b), (c), (d) and (f) shall act
as part-time Members.
(5) The Accreditation Council may invite such experts as may be determined
by it as special invitees for its meetings in such manner as may be specified by it by
regulations in consultation with the Central Government: 35
Provided that when the Accreditation Council is deciding upon a matter
pertaining to the exclusive domain of any specific professional body, it may invite
nominee of the said body.
Functions of 14. (1) The Accreditation Council shall function as an accrediting body and
Accreditation shall take such steps to supervise and oversee independent ecosystem of 40
Council.
accreditation.
(2) Without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing provisions, the steps
referred to in sub-section (1), may provide for all or any of the following matters,
namely:––
11
(a) develop an outcome based Institutional Accreditation Framework in
consultation with relevant stakeholders, which shall be used to assess and
accredit higher educational institutions leading to accreditation with or
without open and distance learning, online or digital learning, or any other
5 form of learning, as the case may be;
(b) carry out accreditation using technology driven systems operated
through the public website referred to in clause (b) of sub-section (2) of
section 11;
(c) empanel and de-empanel accrediting institutions, as the case may be,
10 to develop a high-quality and high-integrity accreditation system with
adequate capacity to meet the requirements for accreditation of higher
educational institutions;
(d) monitor and review the performance of accrediting institutions;
(e) compile and disseminate all accreditation related information
15 regarding the accreditation of higher educational institutions to the public
including stakeholders for ensuring the highest degree of probity is maintained
through complete transparency;
(f) recommend to the Regulatory Council for imposition of penalties
referred to in section 33 for contravention of the matters relating to
20 accreditation of higher educational institutions;
(g) assess the requirements of accreditation and develop a perspective
plan for ensuring accreditation of all higher educational institutions;
(h) furnish such information to the Commission as the Commission may
require in connection with the performance of its functions under this Act; and
25 (i) perform such other functions as may be prescribed.
(3) The functions of the Accreditation Council under clauses referred to in
sub-section (2), other than clauses (f), (g), (h) and (i), shall be such as may be
specified by the regulations made by the Accreditation Council in this regard.
(4) The Institutional Accreditation Framework shall lay down parameters for
30 accreditation involving only educational outcomes, good governance, financial
probity and stability and transparent public disclosure of all academic, operational
and financial matters to guide the accrediting institutions in such manner as may be
specified by regulations made by the Accreditation Council.
(5) The higher educational institutions shall accurately state educational inputs
35 and specific intended educational outcomes in their Institutional Development Plan
which should be publicly disclosed and such plan should emphasise the quality of
educational outcomes and governance mechanisms and their adherence.
Explanation.––For the purposes of this sub-section, the expression
“Institutional Development Plan” means a strategic document designed to ensure
40 the alignment of Institution with educational, research and societal goals, while
maintaining compliance with national standards and regulations and includes the
objectives, initiatives, resource allocation of the institution and its timelines for
institutional development in the short, medium and long term.
(6) The Accreditation Council shall meet at such places and times, and follow
45 such rules of procedure in regard to the transaction of business at its meetings,
(including quorum at such meetings), as may be specified by the regulations made
by the Accreditation Council in consultation with the Central Government.
12
CHAPTER V
VIKSIT BHARAT SHIKSHA MANAK PARISHAD
Establishment of 15. (1) With effect from such date as the Central Government may, by
Standards
notification, appoint, there shall be established a Standards Council to be known as
Council.
the Viksit Bharat Shiksha Manak Parishad. 5
(2) The Standards Council, referred to in sub-section (1), shall be a body
corporate by the name aforesaid having perpetual succession and a common seal
with power, subject to the provisions of this Act, to acquire, hold and dispose of
property, both movable and immovable, and to contract and shall, by the said name,
sue or be sued. 10
(3) The Standards Council shall consist of a President and other Members, not
exceeding fourteen in number.
(4) Of the fourteen Members referred to in sub-section (3), there shall be––
(a) two eminent and distinguished academicians not below the rank of
Professor—Members;
15
(b) one eminent and distinguished academicians not below the rank of
Professor from a State Higher Educational Institution—Member;
(c) one nominee of States and Union territories, on a rotation
basis—Member;
(d) one person representing the Council of Architecture—Member; 20
(e) three eminent and distinguished academicians not below the rank of
Professor from Institutions of national importance—Members;
(f) two eminent experts—Members;
(g) one nominee of the Department of Higher Education in the
Ministry of Education, who shall not be below the rank of Joint Secretary to 25
the Government of India—ex officio Member;
(h) one Member to be nominated by the Regulatory Council from
amongst its Members—ex officio Member;
(i) one Member to be nominated by the Accreditation Council from
amongst its Members—ex officio Member; 30
(j) Member Secretary:
Provided that the Members referred to in clauses (a) and (j) shall act as full-
time Members and the Members referred to in clauses (b), (c), (d), (e) and (f) shall
act as part-time Members.
(5) The Standards Council may invite such experts as may be determined by 35
it as special invitees for its meetings in such manner as may be specified by
regulations made by it:
Provided that when the Standards Council is deciding upon a matter pertaining
to the exclusive domain of any specific professional body, it may invite nominees
of the said body. 40
Functions of 16. (1) The Standards Council shall take all such steps as it may think fit for
Standards the determination of academic standards in higher educational institutions for higher
Council. education and for the purpose of performing the functions under this Act.
13
(2) Without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing provisions, the steps
referred to in sub-section (1) may provide for all or any of the following matters,
namely:—
(a) frame expected learning outcomes (also referred to as “graduate
5 attributes”) for higher education programmes which may guide higher
educational institutions;
(b) provide guiding principles for learning outcomes, to ease the
integration of vocational education into higher education;
(c) provide the nomenclature of “certificate” and “diploma”, and the
10 levels of educational qualifications, other than “Doctor of Philosophy”,
“degree”, “diploma” and “certificate”, which may be awarded by any higher
educational institution, in consultation with the Central Government;
(d) provide the norms for credit transfers, equivalence and other related
matters to facilitate mobility of students;
15 (e) develop a suggested broad framework of higher education
qualifications for institutions and programmes and across the open and
distance learning, online, and the traditional “in-class” modes, within which
institutions and faculty shall have the autonomy to innovate on matters of
curriculum, pedagogy and assessment;
(f) promote quality of academic instruction and determine minimum
20
academic standards in higher educational institutions;
(g) lay down clear minimum standards for setting up and operation of
higher educational institutions;
(h) establish non-binding frameworks for innovative development of
25 curriculum, pedagogy, assessment, and student support, including the
promotion of internationalisation of education to attain world class standards
in all areas as well as the Indianisation of education to promote Bharatiya
knowledge, arts and languages, for enhanced student experiences and to meet
learning outcomes;
(i) develop a perspective plan for determination of academic standards
30
in higher educational institutions;
(j) lay down such qualifications, as may be determined by it, that should
be required of any person to be appointed as the staff of the higher educational
institution:
35 Provided that nothing in this clause shall prohibit the appointment of
distinguished experts with remarkable contributions in their respective fields;
(k) furnish such information to the Commission as the Commission may
require in connection with the performance of its functions under this Act; and
(l) perform such other functions as may be prescribed:
40 Provided that the Standards Council shall consider the inputs of such
professional bodies, where required, while drawing the curriculum framework,
laying down academic standards and co-ordination between teaching, research and
extension of their domain or discipline.
(3) The functions of the Standards Council under clauses referred to in
45 sub-section (2), other than clauses (b), (c), (h), (j), (k) and (l), shall be such as may
be specified by the regulations made by it.
(4) The Standards Council shall meet at such places and times, and follow
such rules of procedure in regard to the transaction of business at its meetings
(including quorum at such meetings) as may be specified by the regulations made
50 by the Standards Council in consultation with the Central Government.
14
CHAPTER VI
GENERAL PROVISIONS
17. (1) The right of conferring or granting degrees shall be exercised
Right to confer
degrees. only by a University or an Institution specially empowered by an Act of
Parliament to confer or grant degrees, or a higher educational institution empowered 5
under this Act.
(2)Save as provided in sub-section (1), no person or authority shall confer or
grant or hold himself or itself out as entitled to confer or grant, any degree.
(3)For the purposes of this section, “degree” means any such degree as may,
with the previous approval of the Central Government, be notified in this behalf by 10
the Standards Council.
Qualification 18. The Chairperson shall be a person of eminence and reputation to be
and appointment appointed in an honorary capacity by the President of India on the recommendations
of Chairperson
of the Central Government.
of Commission.
Qualification for 19.(1) The President of the respective Councils shall be persons of eminence 15
appointment as and standing in the field of higher education or research possessing leadership
Presidents and abilities, capacity for institution building and governance of institutions of higher
full-time
learning, and having experience of not less than ten years as Professor or equivalent
Members of
Councils. in a distinguished higher educational institution or University.
(2)The full-time Members of the Councils shall be distinguished and eminent 20
academicians of repute not below the rank of Professor and having experience of
not less than ten years as Professor or equivalent in a distinguished higher
educational institution or University or a scholar of repute in a research institute, or
persons of outstanding ability, proven administrative capacity and integrity.
Appointment of 20.(1) The Presidents and full-time Members of the Councils shall be appointed 25
Presidents and by the President of India on the recommendations of the Search-cum-Selection
Members of Committee referred to in section 21.
Councils and
Member
(2)The other Members of the Commission and the Councils, other than the ex
Secretary of
Commission and officio Members and Member Secretary of the Commission and the Councils, shall
Councils. be appointed by the President of India on the recommendations of the Central 30
Government in such manner as may be prescribed.
(3) For efficient administration of the Commission, the Central Government
shall appoint Member Secretary not below the rank of the Secretary to the
Government of India or who has served as Secretary to the Government of India in
such manner as may be prescribed. 35
(4)For efficient administration of the Councils, the Central Government shall
appoint Member Secretaries not below the rank of the Joint Secretary to the
Government of India or who has served as Joint Secretary to the Government of
India in such manner as may be prescribed.
Search-cum- 21.(1) The Search-cum-Selection Committee shall consist of–– 40
Selection
Committee. (a)two eminent experts nominated by the Central Government with one
of them designated as the Chairperson of the Search-cum-Selection
Committee; and
(b)the Secretary to the Government of India in the Department of Higher
Education, Ministry of Education—ex officio Member. 45
(2) The term of the Search-cum-Selection Committee and the manner of
selection of panel of names shall be such as may be prescribed.
15
22.(1) The term of office of the Chairperson of the Commission shall be for Term of office
for Chairperson,
an initial period of three years, which may be extended up to five years, from the
Presidents of
date of his appointment and he shall be eligible for re-appointment for another term.
Councils,
Members of
(2)The term of office of the President of each Council shall be for a period of
Councils and
5 three years which may be extended up to five years from the date of their nominees of
appointment or till they attain the age of seventy years, whichever is earlier and they States and Union
territories.
shall be eligible for re-appointment for another term.
(3)The term of office of the Members of the Commission and Councils, other
than ex officio Members, shall be for a period of three years or till they attain the
age of seventy years, whichever is earlier and they shall be eligible for
10
re-appointment for another term:
Provided that the term of office of ex officio Members of the Commission or
the Councils, as the case may be, shall continue as long as they hold the office by
virtue of which they are such Members.
15 (4) The nominees of States and Union territories with respect to Regulatory
Council and Standards Council shall be appointed as Members on rotation basis for
a period of one year, in such manner as may be determined by the Central
Government.
23.(1) In the event of the occurrence of a vacancy in the office of— Filling of casual
vacancies in
(a)the Chairperson of the Commission; or Commission or
20
Councils.
(b)the President of any Council; or
(c)any full time Member of the Councils; or
(d)the Member Secretary of the Commission or the Councils, as the case
may be,
25 whether by reason of his death, resignation or inability to discharge his functions
owing to illness or other incapacity, or by any other reason, may be filled by the
Central Government by making a fresh appointment from the date on which such
vacancy occurs and the Chairperson, President or Member of the Commission or
Councils so appointed shall hold office for the remainder of the term of office of the
person in whose place he is so appointed or till the appointment of regular
30
incumbent, whichever is earlier:
Provided that during the period of occurrence of vacancy in the office of the
Chairperson or the Presidents of the Councils, as the case may be, the Central
Government may nominate any other Member of the Commission or the Councils
35 to hold the office of the Chairperson or the Presidents of the Councils, as the case
may be.
24. (1) The President of India may, on the recommendation of the Central Removal of
Chairperson or
Government, by order, remove the Chairperson of the Commission or President or
any other
any full-time Member of the respective Councils, who–– Member of
Commission or
40 (a)has been adjudged an insolvent; or Presidents or
Members of
(b)has been convicted of an offence which, in the opinion of the Central Councils.
Government, involves moral turpitude; or
(c)has become physically or mentally incapable of acting as a Member; or
(d)is of unsound mind and stands so declared by a competent court; or
45 (e) has acquired such financial or other interest as is likely to affect
prejudicially his functions as a Member; or
(f) has so abused his position as to render his continuance in office
prejudicial to public interest; or
16
(g) has violated the provisions of this Act or the rules and regulations
made thereunder.
(2) No Member shall be removed under clauses (e), (f) and (g) of
sub-section (1) unless he has been given a reasonable opportunity of being heard in
the matter. 5
(3) The Chairperson of the Commission, the President or any full-time
Member of the Councils may resign their office by giving in writing to the Central
Government a notice of not less than three months:
Provided that such person may be relieved from duties earlier than three
months or be allowed to continue beyond three months until a successor is 10
appointed, if the Central Government, so decides.
(4) The other Members of the Commission or the Councils, as the case may
be, shall be removed by the President of India on the recommendations of the
Central Government in such manner as may be prescribed.
Declaration by 25. (1) The Chairperson or any other Member of the Commission or the 15
Chairperson or Presidents or the Members of the respective Councils shall, immediately after
any other
appointment and every year thereafter, make a declaration to the extent of his
Member of
Commission or interest, whether direct or indirect and whether pecuniary or otherwise, in any
Presidents or institution of research or higher educational institution or in any other professional
Members of or financial activity, as may be prescribed. 20
Councils.
(2)The declaration so made under sub-section (1), shall be placed in the public
domain by the Commission or Councils, as the case may be.
Restriction of 26. The Chairperson or full-time Members of the Commission or the
reemployment. Presidents or the full-time Members of the respective Councils shall not, for a period
of two years from the date on which they cease to hold office, accept any 25
employment in, or connected with their domain of duty as Chairperson or Members
of the Commission, Presidents or full-time Member of the Councils, as the case may
be, under this Act or the rules and regulations made thereunder:
Provided that nothing contained in this section shall apply to any employment
under the Central Government or a State Government or any statutory authority or 30
any Central or State University or institution:
Provided further that this section shall not be applicable in cases of repatriation
to the parent cadre upon completion of tenure.
Salary, 27. (1) The salary and allowances payable to, and the other terms and
allowances and conditions of service of the Presidents and full-time Members of the respective 35
other terms and
Councils and Member Secretary of the Commission and Councils, other than
conditions of
service of ex officio Members, shall be such as may be prescribed:
Presidents and
other full-time Provided that the part-time Members of the Commission and respective
Members of Councils shall be entitled to such allowances as may be determined by the Central
respective Government. 40
Councils and
Member
(2) The salary, allowances and other terms and conditions of service of the
Secretary of
Commission and Presidents and full-time Members of the respective Councils and Member-Secretary
Councils. of the Commission and Councils, shall not be varied to their disadvantage after their
appointment.
Vacancy, etc., 28.No act or proceedings of the Commission or the Councils shall be invalid 45
not to invalidate merely by reason of––
proceedings of
Commission or (a)any vacancy in, or any defect in the constitution of the Commission
Councils.
or the Councils, as the case may be; or
17
(b)any defect in the appointment of a person acting as a Chairperson of
the Commission or President of the Council; or
(c)any irregularity in the procedure of the Commission or Councils not
affecting the merits of the case.
5 29.The Chairperson and Members of the Commission, and the President and Oath of office.
Members of the respective Councils shall, before entering upon their office, make
and subscribe to an oath of office and of secrecy in such form, manner and before
such authority, as may be prescribed.
30. The head offices of the Commission and the Councils shall be at such Head offices of
10 places as may be notified by the Central Government. Commission and
Councils.
31. Subject to such rules as may be made by the Central Government in this Secretariats for
behalf, including the organisation structure, maintenance of lien, tenure of Commission and
Councils.
appointment and recruitment rules, the Commission and each of the Councils shall
have separate Secretariats for the discharge of responsibilities and efficient
performance of its functions under this Act.
15
32. The Chairperson and Presidents of the Councils, and Members, officers Members, etc.,
and employees of the Commission or Councils shall be deemed to be public servants to be public
servants.
within the meaning of clause (28) of section 2 of the Bharatiya Nyaya Sanhita, 2023.
45 of 2023.
CHAPTER VII
20 CONTRAVENTIONS, PENALTIES AND ADJUDICATION
33. (1) The Regulatory Council may impose penalties on higher educational Penalties.
institutions for contravention of the provisions of this Act or the rules or regulations
made thereunder, in the following manner, namely:––
(a)if a higher educational institution contravenes the provisions of this
25 Act or the rules or regulations made thereunder, the Regulatory Council may
issue a notice in writing to such institution and seek clarification for
rectification of mistakes committed by the institution and if such mistake is
not rectified within the period specified in the notice, there shall be imposed a
penalty which shall not be less than ten lakh rupees;
30 (b)if the higher educational institution again contravenes the provisions
of this Act or the rules or regulations made thereunder, the Regulatory Council
may impose a penalty which shall not be less than thirty lakh rupees, or
recommend to the Central Government or the appropriate State Government
or appropriate body within the higher educational institutions, as the case may
35 be, for the removal of persons found to be responsible for such contraventions
from the employment, or review the level of autonomy accorded, both
academic and administrative and revise the same, pending rectification of the
violation, or withhold or recommend to the appropriate Government for
withholding from the higher educational institution the grants proposed to
40 be made;
(c) further, if the higher educational institution again contravenes the
provisions of this Act or rules and regulations made thereunder, and if such
contravention is a continuing one or persistent, the Regulatory Council may
impose a penalty which shall not be less than seventy-five lakh rupees, or
45 recommend to the Central Government or appropriate State Government to
suspend or otherwise modify the right to confer certificates, diplomas or
degrees, as the case may be, or advise the affiliating University to revoke the
affiliation of the higher educational institution, or recommend to the Central
Government or appropriate State Government, as the case may be, the closure
or winding up of the higher educational institution and place the
50
recommendation in the public domain:
18
Provided that for the purposes of ascertaining the contravention, the
Regulatory Council may cause an inspection of any higher educational institution
by such person or persons as it may direct:
Provided further that the penalties under clauses (b) and (c) of this sub-section
shall be imposed after giving such higher educational institution a reasonable 5
opportunity of being heard.
(2) If any person establishes a University or higher educational institution
without the approval of the Central Government or the respective State Government,
such person shall be liable to a penalty which shall not be less than two crore rupees
or such amount as may be specified from time to time along with immediate closure 10
of such institution in such manner as may be prescribed.
Adjudication of 34.For the purposes of adjudging the penalties under this Act, the Regulatory
penalties. Council shall set up an adjudicatory mechanism, in such manner as may be prescribed.
Crediting sums 35. All sums realised by way of penalties under this Act shall be credited to
realised by the Fund. 15
penalties.
Penalty not to 36. The Regulatory Council shall take steps to ensure that the imposition of
affect interest of any penalty under this Act or the rules and regulations made thereunder, does not
students. affect the interests of the students or cause any monetary repercussions for the
students enrolled therein.
Appeal against 37.Any person aggrieved by any order made by the Commission or any of the 20
order or decision Councils, may prefer an appeal to the Central Government within such period and in
of Commission
such manner as may be prescribed and the decision of the Central Government thereon
or Councils.
shall be binding on the parties.
CHAPTER VIII
FINANCE, ACCOUNTS AND AUDIT 25
38.(1) The Central Government may, after due appropriation made by Parliament
Grants by
Central by law in this behalf, make to the Commission grants of such sums of money as the
Government. Central Government may think fit for being utilised for the purposes of this Act.
(2)The Commission may make due appropriations to the Councils.
Fund of 39.(1) The Commission shall have its own Fund to be called the Viksit Bharat 30
Commission. Shiksha Adhishthan Fund and all sums which may, from time to time, be granted to
it by the Central Government and all the receipts of the Commission and the
Councils (including any sum which any State Government or any other authority or
person may deposit) shall be carried to the Fund and all payments by the
Commission and Councils shall be made therefrom. 35
(2) All moneys belonging to the Fund shall be deposited in such banks or
invested in such manner as may, subject to the approval of the Central Government,
be decided by the Commission.
(3) The Commission may spend such sums as it thinks fit for performing its
functions under this Act, and such sums shall be treated as expenditure payable 40
out of the Fund and such funds shall be applied for carrying out the provisions of
this Act and any functions assigned by the Central Government to the Commission
and Councils.
40. In each financial year, the Commission shall, in co-ordination with the
Budget.
Councils, prepare a budget for the next financial year showing the estimated receipts 45
and expenditure, in such form and within such period as may be prescribed.
41. (1) The Commission shall, in co-ordination with the Councils and in
Accounts and
audit. consultation with the Comptroller and Auditor-General of India, maintain proper
accounts and other relevant records and prepare an annual statement of accounts in
such form and manner as may be prescribed. 50
19
(2) The accounts of the Commission and Councils referred to in
sub-section (1), shall be audited by the Comptroller and Auditor-General of India at
such intervals as may be specified by him and any expenditure incurred in
connection with such audit shall be payable by the Commission.
(3) The Comptroller and Auditor-General of India and any other person
5
appointed in connection with the audit of the accounts of the Commission
and the Councils shall have the same rights, privileges and authority in
connection with such audit as the Comptroller and Auditor-General of India
generally has, in connection with the audit of the Government accounts and, in
particular, shall have the right to demand the production of books of accounts,
10
connected vouchers and other documents and papers and to inspect the office
of the Commission.
(4) The accounts of the Commission and the Councils as certified by the
Comptroller and Auditor-General of India or any other person appointed by him in
15 this behalf, together with the audit report thereon, shall be forwarded by the
Commission annually to the Central Government which shall cause the same to be
laid before each House of Parliament.
42.(1) The Commission shall, in co-ordination with the Councils, furnish to the Furnishing of
Central Government, in such form, manner and within such period as may be prescribed returns and
reports to
20 or as the Central Government may direct, such reports and statements, containing such Central
particulars in regard to any matter under the jurisdiction of the Commission or the Government.
Councils, as the Central Government may, from time to time, require.
(2)The Commission shall, in co-ordination with the Councils, prepare once in
every year, in such form and within such period, as may be prescribed, an annual
report giving a summary of activities of the Commission and the Councils during
25
the previous year and copies of the reports shall be forwarded to the Central
Government.
(3) A copy of the report received under sub-section (2) shall be laid by the
Central Government, as soon as it may be after it is received, before each House of
30 Parliament.
(4) The Commission shall place its respective annual report referred to in
sub-section (2) in the public domain as soon as the same is laid before each House
of Parliament.
CHAPTER IX
35 MISCELLANEOUS
43.(1) The Commission and each of the Councils constituted and established Temporary
under this Act, may associate with itself, in such manner and for such purposes as association of
persons with
may be specified by regulations made under this Act in this behalf, with the approval
Commission or
of Central Government, any person whose assistance or advice it may desire in Councils for
40 carrying out any of the provisions of this Act or the rules and regulations made particular
purposes.
thereunder.
(2)A person associated with it by the Commission or the Councils, as the case
may be, under sub-section (1) for any purpose, shall have a right to take part in the
discussions relevant to that purpose, but shall not have a right to vote at a meeting
45 of the Commission or the Councils, as the case may be, and shall not be a member
for any other purpose.
44.All orders, decisions and other instruments issued by the Commission and Authentication
of orders and
Councils shall be authenticated by the signature of the Member Secretary of the
other
Commission or Council, as the case may be.
instruments of
Commission and
of each Council.
20
45.(1) In the discharge of its functions under this Act, each body constituted
Power of Central
Government to or established under this Act, shall be bound by such directions on questions of
issue directions. policy, as the Central Government may give in writing to such body from
time to time.
(2)In case of a disagreement between the Central Government and any of the 5
bodies constituted or established under this Act as to whether a question is or is not
a question of policy, the decision of the Central Government shall be final.
(3) The Central Government may direct the Commission or the Councils to
perform such other functions as it deems fit.
Delegation of 46.The Commission or the Councils, as the case may be, may, by notification, 10
powers. delegate to any Member or Member Secretary, subject to such conditions, if any, as
may be specified in such notification, such of its powers and functions under
this Act (except the power to make regulations under section 51) as it may
deem necessary.
Power of Central 47.(1) If at any time the Central Government is of the opinion that― 15
Government to
supersede (a) the Commission or any of the Councils is unable to discharge
Commission and
the functions and duties imposed on it by or under the provisions of
Councils
this Act; or
established
under this Act.
(b) the Commission or the Councils, as the case may be, established
under this Act has persistently made default in complying with any direction 20
given by the Central Government under this Act or in the discharge of the
functions and duties imposed on it by or under the provisions of this Act,
the Central Government may, with the prior approval of the President of India, by
order published in the Official Gazette, supersede the Commission or the Councils,
as the case may be, for such period, not exceeding six months, as may be specified 25
in the order:
Provided that before issuing any such order, the Central Government shall give
an opportunity to the Commission or the Councils, as the case may be, to show cause
as to why it should not be superseded and shall consider the explanations and
objections, if any, of the Commission or the Councils, as the case may be. 30
(2) Upon the publication of an order under sub section (1) superseding the
Commission or the Councils, as the case may be,––
(a)the Chairperson of the Commission, or the Presidents of the Councils
and other Members of the Commission or the Councils, as the case may be,
shall, as from the date of supersession, vacate the offices as such; 35
(b) all the powers, functions and duties which may, by or under the
provisions of this Act, be exercised or discharged by or on behalf of the
Commission or the Councils shall, until the Commission or the Councils, as
the case may be, is reconstituted as per the provisions of this Act, be exercised
and discharged by the Central Government or such person or persons as that 40
Government may direct; and
(c) all properties owned or controlled by the Commission or the
Councils, as the case may be, shall, until such body is reconstituted, remain
vested in the Central Government.
(3)On the expiration of the period of supersession specified in the order issued 45
under sub-section (1), the Central Government may––
(a)extend the period of supersession for such further term not exceeding
six months, as it may consider necessary; or
21
(b)reconstitute the Commission or the Councils, as the case may be, by
fresh appointment and in such case, the Members who vacated their offices
under clause (a) of sub-section (2) shall not be deemed disqualified for
appointment:
5 Provided that the Central Government may, at any time before the
expiration of the period of supersession, whether as originally specified under
sub-section (1) or as extended under this sub-section, take action under
clause (b) of this sub-section.
(4)The Central Government shall cause an order issued under sub-section (1)
and a complete report of any action taken under this section and the circumstances
10
leading to such action to be laid before each House of Parliament, while the
Parliament is in session, for a total period of thirty days which may be comprised in
one session or in two or more successive sessions.
48.No suit, prosecution, or other legal proceedings shall lie against any office Protection of
action taken in
15 bearer or officer or employee of the Commission or Council, as the case may be, for
good faith.
anything which has been done or intended to be done in good faith under this Act.
49. The provisions of this Act shall have effect irrespective of anything Act to have
inconsistent therewith contained in any other law for the time being in force: overriding
effect.
Provided that the institutional autonomy and independence accorded to the
20 Institutions of national importance and the institutions of eminence shall remain
duly protected in the manner as may be specified through regulations with the prior
approval of the Central Government.
50. (1) The Central Government may, by notification, and subject to the Power to make
condition of previous publication, make rules for carrying out the provisions of rules.
25 this Act.
(2) In particular, and without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing
powers, such rules may provide for all or any of the following matters, namely:––
(a)the other functions of the Commission under clause (l) of section 9;
(b) the other functions of the Regulatory Council under clause (r) of
30 sub-section (2) of section 11;
(c)the manner in which any existing or newly accredited university shall
establish constituent college, off-campuses and multiple campuses under
sub-section (2) of section 12;
(d) the other functions of the Accreditation Council under clause (i) of
35 sub-section (2) of section 14;
(e) the other functions of the Standards Council under clause (k) of
sub-section (2) of section 16;
(f) the manner in which other Members of the Commission and the
Councils shall be appointed by the President of India on the recommendations
40 of the Central Government under sub-section (2) of section 20;
(g) the manner in which Member-Secretary of the Commission and
Councils shall be appointed by the Central Government under sub-section (3)
of section 20;
(h)the term of the Search-cum-Selection Committee and the manner of
45 selection of panel of names under sub-section (2) of section 21;
(i) the manner and period of inquiry for removal of Chairperson,
President and full-time Members of the respective Councils under
sub-section (1) of section 24;
22
(j) the manner in which other Members of the Commission or the
Councils, as the case may be, may be removed by the Central Government
under sub-section (4) of section 24;
(k)the manner in which declaration shall be made by the Chairperson or
any other Member of the Commission or the President or the Members of the 5
respective Councils under sub-section (1) of section 25;
(l) the salary and allowances payable to, and the other terms and
conditions of service of the Presidents and full-time Members of the respective
Councils and Member-Secretary of the Commission and the Councils, under
sub-section (1) of section 27; 10
(m) the form, manner, and authority before which the Chairperson and
Members of the Commission and Presidents of the Councils and its Members
shall before entering upon their office, make and subscribe to an oath of office
and of secrecy under section 29;
(n)the Secretariats for the Commission and Councils under section 31; 15
(o) the manner for closure of such higher educational institution
established without the approval of the Central Government or appropriate
State Government under sub-section (2) of section 33;
(p) the manner of setting up of adjudicatory mechanism by the
Regulatory Council under section 34; 20
(q) the period and manner for preferring an appeal against the order of
the Commission or any of the Councils before the Central Government under
section 37;
(r) the form and period at which the budget is to be prepared by the
Commission under section 40; 25
(s) the form and manner in which the Commission shall maintain
accounts and other relevant records and prepare an annual statement of
accounts under sub-section (1) of section 41;
(t) the form, manner and period within which the Commission shall 30
furnish to the Central Government reports and statements under
sub-section (1) of section 42;
(u)the form and period at which the Commission in co-ordination with
the Councils shall prepare, once in every year, an annual report under
sub-section (2) of section 42; 35
(v) any other matter to be provided by rules for carrying out the
provisions of this Act.
(3)The power to make rules under this section shall include the power to make
such rules or any of them retrospectively from a date not earlier than the date on
which this Act shall come into force but no such retrospective effect shall be given 40
to any such rule so as to prejudicially affect the interests of any person to whom
such rule may be applicable.
51. (1) The Commission or the respective Council, as the case may be, may
Power to make
regulations. by notification and subject to the condition of previous publication, make
regulations not inconsistent with the provisions of this Act and the rules made 45
thereunder for carrying out the purposes of this Act.
(2) In particular, and without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing
power, such regulations may provide for all or any of the following matters,
namely:––
23
(a)the procedure in regard to transaction of business at meetings of the
Commission (including quorum at such meetings) under sub-section (1) of
section 8;
(b) the manner to invite such experts as may be determined by the
5 Regulatory Council as “special invitees” for their meetings under
sub-section (5) of section 10;
(c)the functions of the Regulatory Council under clauses referred to in
sub-section (2), other than clauses (d), (e), (j), (o), (p), (q) and (r), under
sub-section (3) of section 11;
10 (d) the manner of authorisation for accredited higher educational
institutions, other than a University, to grant degrees under sub-section (4) of
section 11;
(e)the procedure in regard to transaction of business at meetings of the
Regulatory Council (including quorum at such meetings) under
15 sub-section (6) of section 11;
(f) the manner to invite such experts as may be determined by the
Accreditation Council as ‘special invitees’ for their meetings under
sub-section (5) of section 13;
(g)the functions of the Accreditation Council under clauses referred to
20 in sub-section (2), other than clauses (f), (g), (h) and (i), under sub-section (3)
of section 14;
(h) specifying the Institutional Accreditation Framework under
sub-section (4) of section 14;
(i)the procedure in regard to transaction of business at meetings of the
25 Accreditation Council (including quorum at such meetings) under
sub-section (6) of section 14;
(j) the manner to invite such experts as may be determined by the
Standards Council as special invitees for their meetings under sub-section (5)
of section 15;
(k) the functions of the Standards Council under clauses referred to in
30
sub-section (2), other than clauses (b), (c), (h), (i), (k) and (l) under
sub-section (3) of section 16;
(l)the procedure in regard to transaction of business at meetings of the
Standards Council (including quorum at such meetings) under sub-section (4)
35 of section 16;
(m) the manner and purposes for which the Commission and Councils
may associate with such persons for assistance or advice under sub-section (1)
of section 43;
(n) the manner for protecting the institutional autonomy and
independence accorded to the Institutions of national importance and the
40
institutions of eminence under section 49.
(3) All regulations made under this Act pertaining to co-ordination and
determination of standards in higher educational institutions require compliance by
all higher educational institutions, to enable high standards of quality and excellence
in higher educational institutions subject to the regulations made under clause (n)
45
and the rules made under clause (a) of sub-section (2) of section 50.
52. Every rule and every regulation made and every notification issued Laying before
under this Act shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is made and issued, before Parliament.
each House of Parliament, while it is in session, for a total period of thirty days
50 which may be
24
comprised in one session or in two or more successive sessions, and if, before the
expiry of the session immediately following the session or the successive sessions
aforesaid, both Houses agree in making any modification in the rule or regulation
or notification or both Houses agree that the rule or regulation or notification
should not be made or issued, the rule or regulation or notification shall 5
thereafter have effect only in such modified form or be of no effect, as the case may
be; so, however, that any such modification or annulment shall be without prejudice
to the validity of anything previously done under that rule or regulation or
notification.
Power to remove 53.(1) If any difficulty arises in giving effect to the provisions of this Act, the 10
difficulties. Central Government may, by order published in the Official Gazette, make such
provisions, not inconsistent with the provisions of this Act, as appear to it to be
necessary or expedient for removing the difficulty:
Provided that no order shall be made under this section after the expiry of a
period of three years from the commencement of this Act. 15
(2)Every order made under this section shall be laid, as soon as may be after
it is made, before each House of Parliament.
54. (1) The University Grants Commission, the All India Council for
Transitional
provision. Technical Education and the National Council for Teacher Education established
under the University Grants Commission Act, 1956, the All India Council for 20 3 of 1956.
Technical Education Act, 1987 and the National Council for Teacher Education Act, 52 of 1987.
1993 respectively shall continue to be in force and operate, till the Commission and 17 of 1993.
Councils are established under this Act.
(2)Until appointment of the Chairperson of the Commission, Presidents and
full-time Members of the respective Councils, Member Secretary of the
25
Commission and the Councils and such other Members takes effect, the Central
Government shall, as a transitory measure, by notification, appoint the first
Chairperson of the Commission, the President and full-time Members of the
respective Councils, Member Secretary of the Commission and the Councils and
such other Members, for a period of two years or till the constitution of the 30
Commission and the Councils under the provisions of this Act, whichever is earlier.
(3)The institutions presently regulated by the University Grants Commission,
the All India Council for Technical Education and the National Council for Teacher
Education, shall be continued and shall always be deemed to have been continued,
as if the provisions of the University Grants Commission Act, 1956, the All India 35 3 of 1956.
Council for Technical Education Act, 1987 and the National Council for Teacher 52 of 1987.
Education Act, 1993, had been in force at all material times. 17 of 1993.
55. (1) With effect from such date as the Central Government may, by
Repeal and
savings. notification, appoint in this behalf, the University Grants Commission Act, 1956, 3 of 1956.
the All India Council for Technical Education Act, 1987 and the
40 52 of 1987.
National Council for Teacher Education Act, 1993 shall stand repealed and the
17 of 1993
University Grants Commission, All India Council for Technical Education
and the National Council for Teacher Education established under these Acts shall
stand dissolved.
(2) Notwithstanding the repeal of the enactments referred to in 45
sub-section (1),––
(a) the educational standards, requirements and other provisions of the
University Grants Commission, the All India Council for Technical Education
and the National Council for Teacher Education and the rules and regulations
made thereunder shall continue to be in force and operate till new standards or 50
requirements are specified under this Act or the rules and regulations made 5
thereunder:
25
Provided that anything done or any action taken as regards the
educational standards and requirements under the enactments under repeal and
the rules and regulations made thereunder, shall be deemed to have been done
or taken under the corresponding provisions of this Act and shall continue in
force accordingly unless and until superseded by anything done or by any
5
action taken under this Act:
Provided further that the institutions of higher education under section 3
3 of 1956. of the University Grants Commission Act, 1956 shall be deemed to have been
the institutions under this Act and all the provisions of this Act shall apply to
10 such institutions;
(b)any reference to the said enactments in any law for the time being in
force shall be construed to be a reference to this Act;
(c) any reference to the University Grants Commission, All India
Council for Technical Education and National Council for Teacher Education
in any law or rule or regulation or any contract or other instrument for the time
15
being in force, shall be construed as a reference to the Commission or any of
the Councils constituted and established under this Act, as may be decided by
the Commission;
(d) all property, movable and immovable, of or belonging to the
20 University Grants Commission, All India Council for Technical Education
and National Council for Teacher Education shall vest in the Commission or
any of the Councils, as may be decided by the Central Government;
(e) all rights and liabilities of the University Grants Commission,
All India Council for Technical Education and National Council for
25 Teacher Education shall be transferred to, and be the rights and
liabilities of the Commission or any of the Councils constituted or
established under this Act and shall vest upon the Commission or Council, as
the case may be.
(3)The repeal of the said enactments shall not affect the proceedings pending
30 in various courts or tribunals immediately before the commencement of this Act,
under any of the said enactments and such proceedings shall be carried on and
disposed of as if those enactments subsist notionally.
(4)On the dissolution of the University Grants Commission, All India Council
for Teacher Education and the National Council for Teacher Education, the
35 Chairperson, Vice-Chairperson and other Members of these bodies holding office
as such immediately before such dissolution shall vacate their respective offices and
such Chairperson, Vice-Chairperson and other Members shall be entitled to claim
compensation not exceeding three months’ pay and allowances for premature
termination of their office or of any contract of service.
40 (5) On and from the date of commencement of this Act, every person
employed on a regular basis by the University Grants Commission, All India
Council for Technical Education or National Council for Teacher Education, as the
case may be, immediately before the commencement of this Act shall be deemed to
be employed by the Commission or any of the Councils, as may be decided
by the Commission, by the same tenure, at the same remuneration and
45
upon the same terms and conditions and with the same rights and
privileges as to pension, leave, gratuity, provident fund and other
matters as he would have held the same, if this Act had not been enacted
and shall continue to do so unless and until his employment is terminated or until
50 such tenure, remuneration and terms and conditions are duly altered by the
rules or regulations:
26
Provided that any officer or other employee who has been, immediately before
the dissolution of the University Grants Commission, All India Council for
Technical Education and National Council for Teacher Education appointed on a
deputation basis to the University Grants Commission, All India Council for
Technical Education or National Council for Teacher Education, shall, on such 5
dissolution, stand reverted to his parent cadre, Ministry or Department, as the case
may be.
(6) Save as otherwise provided, the mention of particular matters in this
section, shall not be held to prejudice or affect the general application of section 6
10 of 1897. of the General Clauses Act, 1897, with regard to the effect of repeal. 10
STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
Entry 66 of the Union List (List I) in the Seventh Schedule to the Constitution
of India provides for the co-ordination and determination of standards in institutions
for higher education or research and scientific and technical institutions.
Accordingly, the University Grants Commission was established under the
University Grants Commission Act, 1956 for the coordination and determination of
standards in Universities.
2.Subsequently the size, scale and complexities of higher education sector in
India have increased manifold with over one thousand Universities and more than
sixty thousand higher educational institutions, with more than four crore students
enrolled therein. The expansion of higher education system has also seen
establishment of several statutory regulatory bodies, requiring multiple approvals
by higher educational institutions, inspections, etc., resulting in over-regulation of
the sector and duplication of control. There exists a strong need for providing
simplified regulatory systems for higher educational institutions in the country.
3. The National Education Policy (NEP), 2020 envisions the revision and
revamping of all aspects of the education structure, including its regulation and
governance, to create a new system that is aligned with the aspirational goals of 21st
century education, including Sustainable Development Goal 4 (SDG4), while
building upon the traditions and value systems of our nation.
4.Further, the NEP, 2020 considers that the regulatory system is in need of a
complete overhaul in order to re-energise the higher education sector and enable it
to thrive. The NEP, 2020 envisions a “light but tight” regulatory framework to
ensure integrity, transparency and resource efficiency of the educational system
through audit and public disclosure while encouraging innovation and out-of-the-
box ideas through autonomy, good governance and empowerment.
5. Accordingly, after due consideration of the vision of the NEP, 2020,
analysis and suitable adaption of the global best practices in the field of higher
education, it is proposed to introduce a legislation, namely, the Viksit Bharat
Shiksha Adhishthan Bill, 2025 in Parliament.
6. The Viksit Bharat Shiksha Adhishthan Bill, 2025 provides for the
constitution of a Viksit Bharat Shiksha Adhishthan along with the three Councils,
namely, the Viksit Bharat Shiksha Viniyaman Parishad (the Regulatory Council),
the Viksit Bharat Shiksha Gunvatta Parishad (the Accreditation Council) and the
Viksit Bharat Shiksha Manak Parishad (the Standards Council) to enable and
empower Universities and other higher educational institutions to achieve
excellence in teaching, learning, research and innovation, as an outcome of better
co-ordination and determination of standards in institutions for higher education or
research and scientific and technical institutions.
7. The Bill further provides for repealing the University Grants Commission
Act, 1956, the All India Council for Technical Education Act, 1987 and the National
Council for Teacher Education Act, 1993.
8.The Bill also proposes that the Council of Architecture (CoA), established
under the Architects Act, 1972 will function as a Professional Standard Setting Body
(PSSB), as envisioned in the NEP, 2020. The CoA will have representation in all
the three Councils proposed to be established under the proposed legislation. As the
Member of the Standards Council, the CoA will participate in framing the curricula,
laying down academic standards and co-ordinating between teaching, research and
extension of its domain or discipline. Thus, CoA would set the standards or
expectations in its particular field of learning and practice while having no
regulatory role.
27
28
9. The Viksit Bharat Shiksha Adhishthan will be an apex umbrella body to
provide direction for comprehensive and holistic growth of higher education and
ensure co-ordination between the Councils. The Standards Council shall ensure
synchronisation and determination of academic standards in higher educational
institutions, the Regulatory Council shall ensure co-ordination and maintenance of
standards in higher educational institutions, while the Accreditation Council shall
be an accrediting body to supervise and oversee an independent ecosystem of
accreditation.
10. Membership of the Viksit Bharat Shiksha Adhishthan and the Councils
primarily includes academicians, domain experts and representatives from States,
Union territories, State higher educational institutions and Institutions of national
importance.
11. The Viksit Bharat Shiksha Adhishthan will pave the path for
Atmanirbharta in higher education sector and create a talent pool of students who
will help the country in achieving the vision towards Viksit Bharat. This will
facilitate empowerment of youth by developing critical and innovative thinking
leading to holistic development, provide opportunities for inter-disciplinary and
flexible education thus permitting continuous reskilling and upskilling. The students
will also have access to fair, transparent and robust grievance redressal mechanism.
The Bill will thus make our present and upcoming generations future ready.”.
12.The Bill will bring in the required regulatory reforms to usher in an era of
autonomy of well performing higher educational institutions. The present
challenges faced by higher educational institutions due to multiplicity of regulators
having non-harmonised regulatory approval protocols will be done away with. The
entire system of regulation will be executed through technology driven single
window interactive system for higher educational institutions based upon public self
disclosure. The Regulatory Council will maintain a public portal wherein the higher
educational institutions will be required to report all matters pertaining to financial
probity, good governance, all finances, audits, procedures, infrastructure, faculty
and staff, courses and educational outcomes. The information provided on the public
portal of the Regulatory Council will also be the basis for accreditation of the higher
educational institutions.
13.The Bill will facilitate establishment of global standard higher educational
institutions in the country and significantly improve the Growth Enrolment Ratio
(GER) of the country.
14.The Notes on clauses explain in detail the various provisions contained in
the Bill.
15.The Bill seeks to achieve the above objectives.
NEW DELHI; DHARMENDRA PRADHAN.
The 12th December, 2025.
Notes on clauses
Clause 1 of the Bill seeks to provide for short title and commencement of the
proposed legislation.
Clause 2 of the Bill seeks to provide for application of the proposed
legislation. The proposed legislation applies to (a) all Institutions of national
importance established by an Act of Parliament, under the administrative purview
of the Ministry of Education in the Government of India; (b) such other Institutions
of national importance, established by an Act of Parliament, as may be notified by
the Central Government in the Official Gazette; (c) Universities in India, established
or incorporated by or under a Central Act or a State Act or any other institution
declared as a deemed to be University by any notification by the Ministry of
Education, Department of Higher Education in the Government of India under the
provisions of section 3 of the University Grants Commission Act, 1956, before this
Act came into force; (d) colleges and such other higher educational institutions
affiliated with the Universities or higher educational institutions falling under the
purview of this Act; (e) institutions regulated under the Architects Act, 1972;
(f) institutions regulated under the All India Council for Technical Education Act,
1987; (g) institutions regulated under the National Council for Teacher Education
Act, 1993; (h) institutions of open and distance learning, online education and digital
education recognised by the University Grants Commission; (i) institutions of
eminence; (j) institutions regulated by such other Professional Councils as may be
notified by the Central Government; and (k) other programmes and institutions as
may be notified by the Central Government.
Clause 3 of the Bill seeks to provide for definition of certain expressions used
in the proposed legislation.
Clause 4 of the Bill seeks to provide aims and purposes of the proposed
legislation i.e., for an effective, enabling and responsive system of regulation to
encourage integrity, excellence and public-spiritedness in higher education.
Clause 5 of the Bill seeks to provide for constitution of Viksit Bharat Shiksha
Adhishthan (the Commission) to exercise the powers conferred upon, and perform
the functions assigned to it.
Clause 6 of the Bill seeks to provide for composition of the Commission. The
Commission shall consist of a Chairperson and other Members not exceeding twelve
in number. Of the twelve members, two shall be eminent and distinguished
academicians not below the rank of professor from the State Higher Educational
Institutions and five shall be eminent experts.
Clause 7 of the Bill seeks to provide for the responsibility of the Chairperson
and Member Secretary of the Commission.
Clause 8 of the Bill seeks to provide for meetings of the Commission and
procedure to be followed at the meetings. The Commission may invite, as special
invitees, the Heads of such other bodies as the Commission deems fit, provided that
when the Commission is deciding upon a matter pertaining to the exclusive domain
of any specific Professional Body, the Commission may invite nominees of the said
Body.
Clause 9 of the Bill seeks to provide for functions of the Commission which
inter alia, include—(a) provide high level strategic direction for comprehensive and
holistic growth of higher education and research in a competitive global
environment; (b) develop a roadmap for transforming higher educational institutions
into large multi-disciplinary education and research institutions; (c) develop a
roadmap for promoting India as an education destination; (d) develop a roadmap
for integration and promotion of Bharatiya knowledge, languages and arts across
the multi-disciplinary higher education system; (e) provide strategic direction for
29
30
synergistic functioning of the Councils established under the proposed legislation
and ensure coordination between them; (f) provide financial support for proper
functioning of the Councils; and (g) formulate and suggest such schemes to the
Central Government for improvement of quality of education.
Clause 10 of the Bill seeks to provide for establishment of Viksit Bharat
Shiksha Viniyaman Parishad (Regulatory Council), under the proposed legislation,
which shall function as the common regulator of higher education in India.
Clause 11 of the Bill seeks to provide for the functions of Regulatory Council
which inter alia, include—(a) require that all higher educational institutions attain
full accreditation and thereby autonomy in a graded manner, to transform the current
higher education sector into one comprising autonomous, vibrant and empowered
multidisciplinary higher educational institutions with high-quality education,
research, and service including integrated vocational education, training and skilling
programs; (b) require full online and offline public self-disclosure of all finances,
audits, procedures, infrastructure, faculty, courses, educational outcomes and
accreditation-related information by higher educational institutions on a public
website maintained by the Regulatory Council and on the websites of institutions;
(c) require that all academic, administrative and financial affairs of higher
educational institutions are conducted lawfully and reported truthfully and
transparently on the public website maintained by Regulatory Council and on the
websites of institutions; (d) take swift corrective action in not later than sixty days
in cases of dishonest public self-disclosure or any other academic, administrative or
financial impropriety; (e) require that students have free access to a fair, transparent
and robust grievance redressal mechanism; (f) dispose of complaints or grievances
received against the higher educational institutions from the stakeholders;
(g) require that the minimum standards for setting up and operation of higher
educational institutions as determined by the Standards Council are complied with;
(h)develop a model and roadmap for setting up and operation of higher educational
institutions; (i) specify standards for select foreign universities to operate in India,
with the prior approval of the Central Government; and (j) facilitate high performing
Indian Universities to set up campuses in other countries, with the prior approval of
the Central Government.
Clause 12 of the Bill seeks to provide for establishment of constituent
colleges, off-campuses and multiple campuses.
Clause 13 of the Bill seeks to provide for establishment of the Viksit Bharat
Shiksha Gunvatta Parishad (Accreditation Council) which shall consist of a
President and other Members not exceeding fourteen in number. Of the fourteen
members, two shall be eminent and distinguished academicians, not below the rank
of Professor; two shall be eminent and distinguished academician, not below the
rank of Professor from a State Higher Educational Institutions; one person shall be
representing the Council of Architecture; three shall be eminent and distinguished
academician not below the rank of Professor from the Institutions of national
importance; and two shall be eminent experts.
Clause 14 of the Bill seeks to provide for functions of the Accreditation
Council. The Accreditation Council shall function as an accrediting body to
supervise and oversee independent ecosystem of accreditation. The functions of
Accreditation Council shall inter alia, include—(a) develop an outcome based
Institutional Accreditation Framework in consultation with relevant stakeholders,
which shall be used to assess and accredit higher educational institutions leading to
accreditation with or without open and distance learning, online or digital learning,
or any other form of learning, as the case may be; (b) carry out accreditation using
technology driven systems operated through the public website referred to in
clause (b) of sub-section (2) of section 11; (c) empanel and de-empanel accrediting
31
institutions, as the case may be, to develop a high-quality and high-integrity
accreditation system with adequate capacity to meet the requirements for
accreditation of higher educational institutions; (d) monitor and review the
performance of accrediting institutions; (e) compile and disseminate all
accreditation related information regarding the accreditation of higher educational
institutions to the public including stakeholders for ensuring the highest degree of
probity is maintained through complete transparency; and (f) recommend to the
Regulatory Council for imposition of penalties referred to in section 33 for
contravention of the matters relating to accreditation of higher educational
institutions.
Clause 15 of the Bill seeks to provide for establishment of the Viksit Bharat
Shiksha Manak Parishad (Standards Council) which shall consist of a President and
other Members not exceeding fourteen in number. Of the fourteen Members, two
shall be eminent and distinguished academicians not below the rank of Professor;
one shall be eminent and distinguished academician not below the rank of Professor,
from a State Higher Educational Institution; one shall be nominee of States and
Union territories, on a rotation basis; one person shall be representing the Council
of Architecture; three shall be eminent and distinguished academician not below the
rank of Professor from the Institutions of national importance; and two shall be
eminent experts.
Clause 16 of the Bill seeks to provide for functions of the Standards Council
which shall inter alia, include—(a) frame expected learning outcomes (also referred
to as ‘graduate attributes’) for higher education programmes which may guide
higher educational institutions; (b) provide guiding principles for learning
outcomes, to ease the integration of vocational education into higher education;
(c) provide the nomenclature of “certificate” and “diploma”, and the levels of
educational qualifications, other than “Doctor of Philosophy”, “degree”, “diploma”
and “certificate”, which may be awarded by any higher educational institution, in
consultation with the Central Government; (d) provide the norms for credit transfers,
equivalence and other related matters to facilitate mobility of students; (e) develop
a suggested broad framework of higher education qualifications for institutions and
programmes and across the open and distance learning, online, and the traditional
‘in-class’ modes, within which institutions and faculty shall have the autonomy to
innovate on matters of curriculum, pedagogy, and assessment; (f) promote quality
of academic instruction and determine minimum academic standards in higher
educational institutions; (g) lay down clear minimum standards for setting up and
operation of higher educational institutions; (h) develop a perspective plan for
determination of academic standards in higher educational institutions; and
(j)perform such other functions as may be prescribed by rules.
Clause 17 of the Bill seeks to provide for empowerment of University or an
Institution specially empowered by an Act of Parliament, to confer or grant degrees,
or a higher educational institution empowered under this proposed legislation.
Clause 18 of the Bill seeks to provide for the Chairperson of the Commission
shall be a person of eminence and reputation to be appointed in honorary capacity
by the President of India on the recommendations of the Central Government.
Clause 19 of the Bill seeks to provide for qualification for appointment as
Presidents and Full-time members of Councils.
Clause 20 of the Bill seeks to provide for appointment of Presidents and
Members of Councils and Member-Secretary of Commission and Councils. The
Presidents and full-time members of the Councils shall be appointed by the
President of India on the recommendations of a Search-cum-Selection Committee.
Clause 21 of the Bill seeks to provide for composition of Search cum selection
Committee. The Committee shall consist of two eminent experts nominated by the
Central Government and the Secretary to the Government of India in the Ministry
or Department dealing with Higher Education as an ex officio Member.
32
Clause 22 of the Bill seeks to provide for term of office for Chairperson of the
Commission, Presidents of each of the Councils, Members of the Commission and
Councils, and nominees of States and Union territories with respect to Regulatory
Council and Standards Council.
Clause 23 of the Bill seeks to provide for filling of casual vacancies in
Commission or Councils.
Clause 24 of the Bill seeks to provide for removal of Chairperson of
Commission or any other Member of Commission or Presidents of Councils or
Members of Councils.
Clause 25 of the Bill seeks to provide for declaration by Chairperson or any
other Member of Commission or Presidents or Members of Councils after
appointment and every year thereafter to the extent of his interest, whether direct or
indirect and whether pecuniary or otherwise, in any institution of research or higher
education institution or in any other professional or financial activity.
Clause 26 of the Bill seeks to provide restriction on Chairperson or full-time
Members of the Commission or the Presidents or the full-time Members of the
Councils to accept any employment in, or connected with their domain of duty as
Chairperson or Members of the Commission, Presidents or full-time Member of the
Council, as the case may be, for a period of two years from the date on which they
cease to hold office.
Clause 27 of the Bill seeks to provide for Salary, allowance, and other terms
and conditions of service of Presidents and other full-time Members of respective
Councils and Member-Secretary of Commission and Councils.
Clause 28 of the Bill seeks to provide for no act or proceeding of the
Commission shall be invalid merely by the reason of any vacancy or any defect in
the constitution of the Commission or the Councils or any defect in the appointment
of a person action as a Chairperson of the Commission or President of the Council
or any irregularity in the procedure of the Commission or Councils not affecting the
merits of the case.
Clause 29 of the Bill seeks to provide for making and subscribing to an oath
of office and of secrecy by the Chairperson and Members of the Commission, and
the President and Members of the respective Councils before entering upon their
office.
Clause 30 of the Bill seeks to provide for head offices of the Commission and
the Councils.
Clause 31 of the Bill seeks to provide for separate secretariats for the
Commission and each of the Councils for the efficient performance of their
functions.
Clause 32 of the Bill seeks to provide for the Chairperson and Presidents of
the Councils, and Members, officers and employees of the Commission or Councils
shall be deemed to be public servants.
Clause 33 of the Bill seeks to provide for imposition of penalties by the
Regulatory Council for contravention of the provisions of this proposed legislation,
or the rules or the regulations made thereunder.
Clause 34 of the Bill seeks to provide for adjudication of the penalties under
this proposed legislation and for the said purpose the Regulatory Council shall set
up an adjudicatory mechanism, as may be prescribed by the rules.
Clause 35 of the Bill seeks to provide for crediting of all sums realised by way
of penalties under the proposed legislation to the Fund.
33
Clause 36 of the Bill seeks to provide for the Regulatory Council to take steps
to ensure that the imposition of any penalty under the proposed legislation does not
affect the interests of students or because any monetary repercussions for the
students enrolled therein.
Clause 37 of the Bill seeks to provide for appeal against the order or decision
of the Commission or any of the Councils to the Central Government within such
period and in such manner, as may be prescribed by the rules and such decision shall
be binding on the parties.
Clause 38 of the Bill seeks to provide for the grant by the Central Government
may, after due appropriation made by the Parliament by law in this behalf, of such
sums of money to the Commission, as the Government may think fit for being
utilised for the purposes of the proposed legislation and the Commission may make
due appropriation to the Councils.
Clause 39 of the Bill seeks to provide for the Fund of the Commission to be
called as the Viksit Bharat Shiksha Adhishthan Fund and all sums which may, from
time to time, be granted to it by the Central Government and all the receipts of the
Commission and the Councils shall be carried to the Fund and payments by the
Commission and the Councils shall be made therefrom and the Commission may
spend such sums as it thinks fit for performing its functions under the proposed
legislation.
Clause 40 of the Bill seeks to provide for preparation of budget by the
Commission in coordination with the Councils in respect of the next financial year
showing the estimated receipts and expenditure.
Clause 41 of the Bill seeks to provide for maintenance of proper accounts of
the Commission in coordination with the Councils in consultation with the
Comptroller and Auditor-General of India. The accounts of the Commission and the
Councils as certified by the Comptroller and Auditor-General of India or any other
person appointed by him in this behalf, together with the audit report thereon, shall
be forwarded by the Commission annually to the Central Government which shall
cause the same to be laid before each House of Parliament.
Clause 42 of the Bill seeks to provide for furnishing of returns on reports and
statements, containing such particulars in regard to any matter under the jurisdiction
of the Commission or the Councils to the Central Government, as the Central
Government may, from time to time, require. The Commission in coordination with
the Councils shall prepare once in every year, an annual report giving a summary of
activities of the Commission and the Councils during the previous year and forward
the copy of report to the Central Government which shall be laid before each House
of Parliament.
Clause 43 of the Bill seeks to provide for temporary association of persons
with Commission or Councils for particular purposes as may be specified by
regulations made under the proposed legislation, with the approval of Central
Government and such persons shall have a right to take for in the discussion relevant
to that purpose but shall not have a right to vote a meeting of the Commission or the
Councils, as the case may be, and shall not a Member for any other purpose.
Clause 44 of the Bill seeks to provide for all orders, decisions and other
instruments issued by the Commission and Councils shall be authenticated by the
signature of the Member Secretary of the Commission or Council, as the case
may be.
Clause 45 of the Bill seeks to provide for the power of the Central Government
to issue direction to the Commission on questions of policy.
34
Clause 46 of the Bill seeks to provide for the delegation of powers and
functions by the Commission or the Councils to any Member or Member Secretary,
except the power to make regulations under section 51.
Clause 47 of the Bill seeks to provide for power of the Central Government to
supersede Commission and Councils established under this proposed legislation. If
the Central Government is of the opinion that the Commission or any of the Councils
is unable to discharge the functions and duties imposed on it by or under the
provisions of this proposed legislation, or the Commission or the Councils has
persistently made default in complying with any direction given by the Central
Government under this proposed legislation or in the discharge of the functions and
duties imposed on it by or under the provisions of this proposed legislation, the
Central Government may, with the prior approval of the President of India, by order
published in the Official Gazette, supersede the Commission or the Councils, as the
case may be, for such period, not exceeding six months, as may be specified in
the order.
Clause 48 of the Bill seeks to provide for protection to the office bearer or
officer of the Commission or Council for anything which has been done or intended
to be done in good faith under the proposed legislation.
Clause 49 of the Bill seeks to provide for the provisions of the proposed
legislation shall have effect irrespective of anything inconsistent therewith
contained in any other law for the time being in force.
Clause 50 of the Bill seeks to provide for power of the Central Government to
make rules, subject to the condition of previous publication, not inconsistent with
the provisions of this Act for carrying out the provisions of this proposed legislation.
Clause 51 of the Bill seeks to provide for the power of the Commission or the
respective Councils, subject to the condition of previous publication, to make
regulations consistent with the provisions of this Act and the rules made thereunder
for carrying out the purposes of this proposed legislation.
Clause 52 of the Bill seeks to provide for laying of every rule and regulation
made and every notification issued under the proposed legislation before each
Houses of Parliament.
Clause 53 of the Bill seeks to provide for the power of the Central Government
to remove difficulties by order published in the Official Gazette if any difficulty
arises in giving effect to the provisions of this proposed legislation before the expiry
of a period of three years from the commencement of the proposed legislation.
Clause 54 of the Bill seeks to provide for transitional provisions. Until
appointment of the Chairperson of the Commission, Presidents and full-time
Members of the respective Councils, Member Secretary of the Commission and the
Councils and such other Members takes effect, the Central Government shall, as a
transitory measure, by notification, appoint the first Chairperson of the
Commission, the President and full-time Members of the respective Councils,
Member Secretary of the Commission and the Councils and such other Members,
for a period of two years or till the constitution of the Commission and the Councils
under the provisions of this Act, whichever is earlier. The University Grants
Commission (UGC), the All India Council for Technical Education (AICTE) and
the National Council for Teacher Education (NCTE) established under the
University Grant Commission Act, 1956, the All India Council for Technical
Education Act, 1987 and the National Council for Teacher Education Act, 1993
respectively shall continue to be in force and operate, till the Commission and
Councils are established under this proposed legislation.
35
Clause 55 of the Bill seeks to provide for repeal and savings under the
proposed legislation. The University Grant Commission Act, 1956, the All India
Council for Technical Education Act, 1987 and the National Council for Teacher
Education Act, 1993 shall stand repealed and the University Grant Commission, the
All India Council for Technical Education and the National Council for Teacher
Education established under these Acts shall stand dissolved with effect from such
date as the Central Government may appoint in this behalf. Even after repeal of
these Acts, the educational standards, requirements and other provisions of the
University Grant Commission, the All India Council for Technical Education and
the National Council for Teacher Education and the rules and regulations made
thereunder shall continue to be in force and operate till new standards or
requirements are specified under this Act or the rules and regulations made
thereunder.
FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM
Sub-clause (1) of clause 5 of the Bill provides for constitution of the Viksit
Bharat Shiksha Adhishthan (the Commission) to exercise the powers conferred
upon, and perform the functions assigned to it.
Sub-clause (1) of clause 10 provides for establishment of a Viksit Bharat
Shiksha Viniyaman Parishad (Regulatory Council) which shall function as the
common regulator of higher education in India.
Sub-clause (1) of clause 13 provides for establishment of Viksit Bharat
Shiksha Gunvatta Parishad (Accreditation Council) which shall function as an
accrediting body to supervise and oversee independent ecosystem of accreditation.
Sub-clause (1) of clause 15 provides for establishment of a Viksit Bharat
Shiksha Manak Parishad (Standards Council) which shall take all such steps as it
may think fit for the determination of academic standards in higher educational
institutions for higher education.
Clause 20 provides for appointment of Presidents and Members of Councils,
Members of the Commission and Member Secretaries of Commission and Councils.
Clause 27 provides for salaries and allowances of the Presidents and full-time
Members of the Councils and Member Secretaries of the Commission and the
Councils.
Clause 31 provides for separate secretariats of the Commission and each of
the Councils for the discharge of responsibilities and efficient performance of its
functions under this Act.
Sub-clause (1) of clause 38 provides for grants by the Central Government to
the Commission, after due appropriation made by Parliament by law in this behalf.
Clause 39 provides that the Commission shall have its own Fund to be called
the Viksit Bharat Shiksha Adhishthan Fund. The funds shall be applied for carrying
out provisions of this Act and any functions assigned by the Central Government to
the Commission and Councils thereunder.
Sub-clause (2) of clause 55, inter alia, provides that all property, movable and
immovable, of or belonging to the University Grants Commission, All India Council
for Technical Education and National Council for Teacher Education shall vest in
the Commission or any of the Councils as may be decided by the Central
Government and hence, the budgetary support by the Central Government to the
Commission and its Councils is estimated not to exceed the level of the current
budgetary support given to the University Grants Commission, the All India Council
for Technical Education and the National Council for Teacher Education.
Sub-clause (5) of clause 55, inter alia, provides that every person employed
on a regular basis by the University Grants Commission, All India Council for
Technical Education or National Council for Teacher Education, as the case may
be, immediately before the commencement of this Act shall be deemed to be
employed by the Commission or any of the Councils, as may be decided by the
Commission, by the same tenure, at the same remuneration and upon the same terms
and conditions and with the same rights and privileges as to pension, leave, gratuity,
provident fund and other matters as he would have held the same, if this Act had not
been enacted and shall continue to do so unless and until his employment is
terminated or until such tenure, remuneration and terms and conditions are duly
altered by the rules or regulations.
2.The Fund shall be used for meeting the salaries and allowances payable to
the Presidents of Councils, full-time Members of the Councils, Member Secretaries
of the Commission and Councils and the administrative expenses including the
salaries, allowances payable to the officers and other employees of the Commission,
and the other expenses of the Commission in connection with the discharge of its
functions relating to its establishment and maintenance.
36
37
3.It is proposed to keep the funding to the centrally funded higher educational
institutes out of the purview of the Viksit Bharat Shiksha Adhishthan. The National
Education Policy, 2020 also envisions that the function of funding should be
segregated from the Councils performing the functions of academic standard setting,
regulation and accreditation. Thus, to ensure that the Standards Council, Regulatory
Council and the Accreditation Council fully discharge their specific domain
functions, the function of disbursal of grants to the centrally funded higher
educational institutions shall be accordingly ensured through mechanisms devised
by the Ministry of Education. This will also ensure that the funding to the
Institutions of national importance under the administrative purview of the said
Ministry will be continued and thus does not impact the financial autonomy
presently accorded to the Institutions of national importance.
4.As the actual expenditure would depend on the number of meetings of the
Commission and the Councils, recurring and non-recurring expenditure cannot be
anticipated at this stage.
MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGELATION
Sub-clause (1) of clause 5 of the Bill empowers the Central Government to
appoint and constitute a Commission to be known as the Viksit Bharat Shiksha
Adhishthan, by notification.
Sub-clause (1) of clause 10 of the Bill empowers the Central Government to
appoint and establish a Regulatory Council to be known as the Viksit Bharat Shiksha
Viniyaman Parishad, by notification.
Sub-clause (1) of clause 13 of the Bill empowers the Central Government to
appoint and establish an Accreditation Council to be known as the Viksit Bharat
Shiksha Gunvatta Parishad, by notification.
Sub-clause (1) of clause 15 of the Bill empowers the Central Government to
appoint and establish a Standards Council to be known as the Viksit Bharat Shiksha
Manak Parishad, by notification.
Sub-clause (1) of clause 46 empowers the Commission or the Councils, as the
case may be, by notification, to delegate to any Member or Member Secretary,
subject to such conditions, if any, as may be specified in such notification, such of
its powers and functions under this Act, except the power to make regulations under
section 51, as it may deem necessary.
Sub-clause (1) of clause 47 of the Bill empowers the Central Government to
supersede the Commission or the Councils, as the case may be, for such period, not
exceeding six months, with the prior approval of the President of India, by order
published in the Official Gazette, if at any time the Central Government is of the
opinion that (a) the Commission or any of the Councils is unable to discharge the
functions and duties imposed on it by or under the provisions of this Act; or (b) the
Commission or the Councils, as the case may be, established under this Act has
persistently made default in complying with any direction given by the Central
Government under this Act or in the discharge of the functions and duties imposed
on it by or under the provisions of this Act.
Sub-clause (1) of clause 50 of the Bill empowers the Central Government to
make rules for carrying out the provisions of the proposed legislation. Sub-clause (2)
of the said clause specifies the matters in respect of which such rules may be made.
These matters, inter alia, include––
(a) the other functions of the Commission under clause (l) of section 9;
(b) the other functions of the Regulatory Council under clause (r) of
sub-section (2) of section 11; (c) the manner in which any existing or newly
accredited university shall establish constituent college, off-campuses and
multiple campuses under sub-section (2) of section 12; (d) the other functions of
the Accreditation Council under clause (i) of sub-section (2) of section 14;
(e)the other functions of the Standards Council under clause (k) of sub-section (2)
of section 16; (f) the manner in which other Members of the Commission and the
Councils shall be appointed by the President of India on the recommendations of
the Central Government under sub-section (2) of section 20; (g) the manner in
which Member Secretary of the Commission and Councils shall be appointed by
the Central Government under sub-section (3) of section 20; (h) the term of the
Search-cum-Selection Committee and the manner of selection of panel of names
under sub-section (2) of section 21; (i) the manner and period of inquiry for
removal of Chairperson, President and full-time Members of the respective
Councils under sub-section (1) of section 24; (j) the manner in which other
Members of the Commission or the Councils, as the case may be, may be removed
by the Central Government under sub-section (4) of section 24; (k) the manner in
which declaration shall be made by the Chairperson or any other Member of the
Commission or the President or the Members of the respective Councils
under sub-section (1) of section 25; (l) the salary and allowances payable
to, and the other terms and conditions of service of the Presidents and full-time
38
39
Members of the respective Councils and Member Secretary of the
Commission and the Councils, under sub-section (1) of section 27; (m) the
form, manner, and authority before which the Chairperson and Members of
the Commission and Presidents of the Councils and its Members shall before
entering upon their office, make and subscribe to an oath of office and of
secrecy under section 29; (n) the Secretariats for the Commission and
Councils under section 31; (o) the manner for closure of such higher
educational institution established without the approval of the Central
Government or appropriate State Government under sub-section (2) of section
33; (p) the manner of setting up of adjudicatory mechanism by the Regulatory
Council under section 34; (q) the period and manner for preferring an appeal
against the order of the Commission or any of the Councils before the Central
Government under section 37; (r) the form and period at which the budget is
to be prepared by the Commission under section 40; (s) the form and manner
in which the Commission shall maintain accounts and other relevant records
and prepare an annual statement of accounts under sub-section (1) of section
41; (t) the form, manner and period within which the Commission shall furnish
to the Central Government reports and statements under sub-section (1) of
section 42; (u) the form and period at which the Commission in coordination
with the Councils shall prepare, once in every year, an annual report under
sub-section (2) of section 42; and (v) any other matter to be provided by rules
for carrying out the provisions of this Act.
Sub-clause (1) of clause 51 of the Bill empowers the Commission and the
Councils to make regulations for carrying out the provisions of the proposed
legislation. Sub-clause (2) of the said clause specifies the matters in respect of which
such rules may be made. These matters, inter alia, include––
(a)the procedure in regard to transaction of business at meetings of the
Commission including quorum at such meetings under sub-section (1) of
section 8; (b) the manner to invite such experts as may be determined by the
Regulatory Council as ‘special invitees’ for their meetings under sub-section
(5) of section 10; (c) the functions of the Regulatory Council under clauses
referred to in sub-section (2), other than clauses (d), (e), (j), (o), (p), (q) and
(r), under sub-section (3) of section 11; (d) the manner of authorisation for
accredited higher educational institutions, other than a University, to grant
degrees under sub-section (4) of section 11; (e) the procedure in regard to
transaction of business at meetings of the Regulatory Council (including
quorum at such meetings) under sub-section (6) of section 11; (f) the manner
to invite such experts as may be determined by the Accreditation Council as
‘special invitees’ for their meetings under sub-section (5) of section 13; (g) the
functions of the Accreditation Council under clauses referred to in sub-section
(2), other than clauses (f), (g), (h) and (i), under sub-section (3) of section 14;
(h)specifying the Institutional Accreditation Framework under sub-section (4)
of section 14; (i) the procedure in regard to transaction of business at meetings
of the Accreditation Council (including quorum at such meetings) under sub-
section (6) of section 14; (j) the manner to invite such experts as may be
determined by the Standards Council as special invitees for their meetings
under sub-section (5) of section 15; (k) the functions of the Standards Council
under clauses referred to in sub-section (2), other than clauses (b), (c), (h), (i),
(k) and (l) under sub-section (3) of section 16; (l) the procedure in regard to
transaction of business at meetings of the Standards Council (including
quorum at such meetings) under sub-section (4) of section 16; (m) the manner
and purposes for which the Commission and Councils may associate with such
persons for assistance or advice under sub-section (1) of section 43; and (n)
the manner for protecting the institutional autonomy and independence
accorded to the Institutions of national importance and the institutions of
eminence under section 49.
40
Sub-clause (2) of clause 54 empowers the Central Government, by an order
published in the Official Gazette notification, to appoint the first Chairperson of the
Commission, the President and full-time Members of the respective Councils,
Member Secretary of the Commission and the Councils and such other Members,
for a period of two years or till the constitution of the Commission and the Councils
under the provisions of this Act, whichever is earlier, as a transitory measure, until
the appointment of the Chairperson of the Commission, the Presidents and full-time
Members of the respective Councils, Member Secretary of the Commission and the
Councils and such other Members takes effect.
2. The matters in respect of which rules or regulations may be made or
notifications or orders may be issued in accordance with the provisions of this Bill
are matters of procedure or administrative detail and it is not practicable to provide
for them in the Bill itself.
3.The delegation of legislative power is, therefore, of a normal character.
LOK SABHA
————
A
BILL
to enable and empower the Universities and other higher educational institutions to
achieve excellence in teaching, learning, research and innovation, through co-
ordination and determination of standards in institutions for higher education
or research and scientific and technical institutions, and for that purpose to
constitute a Viksit Bharat Shiksha Adhishthan, to facilitate the Universities
and other higher educational institutions to become independent self-
governing institutions and to promote excellence through a robust and
transparent system of accreditation and autonomy, and for matters connected
therewith or incidental thereto.
————
(Shri Dharmendra Pradhan, Minister of Education)
LOK SABHA
------
CORRIGENDA
to
The Viksit Bharat Shiksha Adhishthan Bill, 2025
[To be/ As introduced in Lok Sabha]
S. No. Page No. Line(s) No. For Read
1. 3 39 “a University;” “a University; or”
2. 5 16 “section 15;” “section 15; and”
3. 6 7 “Members;” “Members; and”
4. 8 “Member Secretary” “a Member
Secretary”
5. 7 42 “ex officio Member;” “ex officio
Member; and”
6. 43 “Member Secretary” “a Member
Secretary”
7. 10 28 “ex officio Member;” “ex officio
Member; and”
8. 29 “Member Secretary” “a Member
Secretary”
9. 12 30 “ex officio Member;” “ex officio
Member; and”
10. 31 “Member Secretary” “a Member
Secretary”
11. 14 In the “Appointment of “Appointment of
marginal Presidents and Presidents and
heading Members of Councils Members of
against clause and Member Councils and
no.20 Secretary of Member
Commission and secretaries of
Councils” Commission and
Councils”
P.T.O.
-2-
12. 16 In the “Salary, allowances “Salary,
marginal and other terms and allowances and
heading conditions of service other terms and
against clause of Presidents and conditions of
no.27 other full-time service of
Members of Presidents and
respective Councils other full-time
and Member Members of
Secretary of respective
Commission and Councils and
Councils” Member
secretaries of
Commission and
Councils”
13. 36 “Member Secretary” “Member
secretaries”
14. 42 “Member-Secretary” “Member
secretaries”
15. 19 22 “Central “that Government”
Government”
16. 21 41 “Member-Secretary” “Member
Secretary”
17. 22 9 “Member-Secretary” “Member
Secretary”
NEW DELHI;
December 13, 2025_________
Agrahayana 22, 1947 (Saka)
